\chapter{The Early Days}

\section{Introduction}

Christ Church Anglican Church, Murgon has stood proudly at the
intersection of Taylor and Watt Streets since its construction in the
latter months of 1919 though the history of Anglicanism in the region
extends much further back than this date. A building is simply a
physical structure to serve as a central bonding place of communal
worship and of fellowship, mutual support and growth in faith for `The
Church'. The people who worship our Lord are God's Kingdom on earth.
Resilient pioneering settlers of the Murgon district felt the need for a
permanent place of worship. Accordingly, the telling of the story of
this building cannot be divorced from the events of the world during
this historic period, and much less so from the story of the people who
brought both it and the town of Murgon into being and who have served
God and the community from the mid-1840s through the decades to where we
are now.

\section{1846--1915 : The Early Pioneering
Days}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.3\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.28\textwidth,right]{images/RGTatham.jpg}
\caption{Rev R G Tatham}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


European settlement in the Murgon area commenced around 1846.\footnote{\emph{Wilderness
  to Wealth} Page 417 JE and EW Easton, \emph{Wilderness to Wealth} Page
  : being a history of the shires of Nanango, Kingaroy, Wondai, Murgon,
  Kilkivan and the Upper Yarraman portion of the Rosalie Shire,
  1850-1950, Brisbane, WR Smith \& Paterson. 1950, repr.1974, p. 417}
From the earliest days of settlement, well before the turn of the
century, ministers from the Bush Brotherhood travelled long distances on
horseback or horse-drawn buggy from Gayndah or Nanango to conduct
services at the various homesteads. One of the earliest names is that of
Reverend G J Tatham of Tiaro who ministered to the area around Murgon --
a mammoth task considering the distances to be covered and the
associated travelling conditions to reach `the big squattages between
Kingaroy and Tiaro'\emph{,} including Kilkivan. Rev Tatham is credited
with having inspired the building of St Matthew's church in
Kilkivan.\footnote{JE and EW Easton, Wilderness to Wealth: being a
  history of the shires of Nanango, Kingaroy, Wondai, Murgon, Kilkivan
  and the Upper Yarraman portion of the Rosalie Shire, 1850-1950,
  Brisbane, WR Smith \& Paterson. 1950, repr.1974, p. 417-418
  \emph{Wilderness to Wealth} p. 417-418}

Established in the mid-1800s Barambah Station\emph{,} a property located
between Nanango and the present township of Murgon, remains as a
recognised landmark stopover for early explorers and travelling clergy
alike. This ecclesiastical arrangement continued up until around 1903.
The township of Murgon, as such, did not exist during these very early
years, though intrepid adventurers were known to have travelled through
the area in search of grazing land. With the development of a thriving
timber industry, it is obvious that they noted the significant stands of
harvestable timber.

Regarding the church's development, a more formal worship arrangement
appears to have begun around 1903 when the spiritual care of the infant
township of Murgon was entrusted solely to the `indefatigable band of
brothers from Gayndah, headed by the Ven. Archdeacon A R Rivers, whose
curates, the Rev B P Walker and J L Puxley, passed through the infant
township on their marathon horse rides'\emph{.} Gayndah Parish continued
this arrangement for 10 years. When the Bush Brotherhood's base was
moved from Gayndah and relocated in Charleville in 1913, the area was
linked to the Nanango Parish. Murgon `was entrusted along with Goomeri,
Boonara, Barambah, Proston and Overseas Settlement, to the spiritual
care of Rev J H Steer, Rev C G B Turner and Rev C C H James, all
assistant curates in Nanango.'

\section{The Coming of the Railway}

With the coming of the steam train era, rail transport played a major
role in opening up areas for closer settlement in many areas of the
developing world, providing, as evident in the burgeoning South Burnett
region, an efficient method for transporting large amounts of produce
such as gold and other minerals, timber to the larger mills, dairy
products to milk, cheese and butter factories, plus moving livestock
like cattle, sheep and pigs as required, as well as being a much faster
means of human travel from one town to another.

The Queensland government finances were at a low level, `but the
government realized that in order to generate wealth it was necessary to
also spend it'\emph{.} Therefore, it embarked on a work-generating
programme `through the construction of public buildings and, where it
was both possible and expedient, the construction of a rail
system'.\footnote{Tony Matthews\emph{, Landscapes of Change: a history
  of the South Burnett}, South Burnett Local Government Association,
  1997 pp. 330-1} A branch line was constructed through the South
Burnett. Commencing at Thebine the line to Kilkivan, a mining entre, was
opened via Dickabram on 1 January 1886 and then on to Kilkivan on 6
December 1886.

A Royal Commission in 1889 recommended that the line be extended from
Kilkivan to Nanango. It was opened progressively to Goomeri on 1 August
1902, to Wondai through Murgon on 14 September 1903, to Kingaroy on 19
December 1904 and Nanango on 13 November 1911. Branch lines were built
from Murgon to Proston and Windera opening on 24 February 1923 and 28
March 1925 respectively and then from Kingaroy to Tarong on 15 December
1915.\footnote{Howard Quinlan and John R Newland, \emph{Australian
  Railway Routes} 1854-2000, Redfern, Australian Railway Historical
  Society (NSW Div), 2000, p. 43: Triumph of Narrow Gauge: a history of
  Queensland Railways, Brisbane Boolarong Press, 1990, rev 1998, pp.
  109, 241.} The line to Kilkivan was constructed by McDermott, Owen and
Company for \pounds113,634 and the extensions to Kingaroy and Nanango were
built under the government's day labour program.\footnote{Commissioner
  of Railways Annual Report 1884-5, pp. 7, 133; 1901-2, pp. 73; 1903-4,
  p. 78.}

At first Murgon was a simple railway stop rather that a station. This
initially was a flimsy tarpaulin structure to provide some `shelter for
passengers and railway staff. The first station mistress was Mrs
Easterby who also served as post mistress. The first permanent structure
appears to have been a shed constructed to store meat, this building
later served as the town's first post office' \emph{--} on the site
where Murgon's modern post office now stands.\footnote{Queensland
  Railways Public Timetable 4 February 1907 and General Appendix.}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{The Birth of a Town}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.6\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.58\textwidth,right]{images/castraOld.jpg}
\caption{Original Castra Building}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Early records refer to Mr George Arnell and his wife, Charlotte
confirming them as significant persons in the history of both the
township of Murgon and the construction of a centre for worship for the
Church of England. A newspaper ``Chat'' with George Arnell in Brisbane's
\emph{Daily Mail} newspaper recorded him as the earliest `living
resident'\emph{,} having arrived in the district in July 1906, so his
recollections are a valuable resource today. The opening of the railway
on 14 September 1903 provided the impetus for the establishment of the
township of Murgon from the cradle of a simple railway shed, as Arnell
described it, which was the meeting place for the small though rapidly
increasing community.

The first permanent selectors recorded in the burgeoning town area were
loggers and bullock team operator, Jack Carey and the other, George W
Nutt who called his selection \emph{Castra} and moved onto his holding
in 1902 when the area was still feeling the effects of the severe
federation drought. The Nutt family began farming and eventually
progressed from a tin hut to a substantial home.

\emph{Castra} meaning \emph{Our~Camp} has come to be generally regarded
as the first home built in Murgon in 1904 \ldots built by the Nutt
family who were sawmillers in the area.\footnote{Tony Matthews,
  \emph{Landscapes of Change: a history of the South Burnett}, South
  Burnett Local Government Association, 1997, Vol. 1, pp. 395/6.} In
February 1979, a \emph{South Burnett Times} article on page 12 indicates
that, the then current owner of the home, Mr Cliff Krebs, offered it to
the Murgon Shire Council for inclusion in the Murgon Dairy and Heritage
Museum complex where it now stands, preserved as a local monument to
early pioneering courage and a valued historical record for coming
generations\emph{. Castra} has a beautiful crows ash timber floor and is
tastefully furnished. Walking through~the door of \emph{Castra} is
certainly stepping back in time and brings back many memories of how~it
was `back then'.\footnote{\emph{South Burnett Times}, 7 February 1979,
  p. 12} \emph{Castra} now stands, with its history recorded, in The
Murgon Dairy and Heritage Museum.\footnote{Murgon Dairy and Heritage
  facebook site.}

As a further tribute to its significance, the name \emph{Castra} was
attached to an Aged Care Facility built in Murgon next to Nutt Street.
The original aging facility was sold to Southern Cross Care, Qld.
demolished and replaced with a much enlarged and updated facility that
was officially opened on March 2013 by Catholic Bishop Brian Finnigan
before a packed room of invited guests.\footnote{https://southburnett.com.au/news2/2013/09/26/new-look-castra-opens-its-doors/}

Arnell's `Chat' indicates that the other early significant house in
Murgon had also been built before survey and leased to early timber
cutters (seemingly Jack Carey) or timber carriers such as Tom Ashton,
Caleb Houghton and Granville Manthorpe, though he gives no official date
for its actual completion. Consequently, it remains open to conjecture
as to whether this house or `the more substantial \emph{Castra'} was
completed first. Department records confirm that \emph{Heusil Barton} --
Lot 44 -- a substantial and larger home was leased from Caleb Houghton
to Charlotte Arnell in 1906.




\begin{wrapfigure}{L}{.6\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.58\textwidth,right]{images/castraToday.png}
\caption{Castra Today}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Following Charlotte's death in 1921 the property remained in the
ownership of Trustees until 1936, though Granville Manthorpe again
leased the property following her passing. A Manthorpe descendant
married Mr Thompson of the firm Stewart and Thompsons, Murgon's drapers.
After some time these partners went their separate ways to establish
Thompsons the Mercers of Murgon and Stewarts Drapery who remained iconic
traders in Murgon for decades following. The \emph{Daily Standard}
article of 24 November 1923, named Charlotte's son-in law, Ronald Edwin
Lever (married Dorothy Arnell), as executor and trustee of her estate.
The property was subsequently sold to Norman Wilson Smyth on 23 August
1937. It stands as a functioning family home to this day. The Lever name
remained prominent in Christ Church's history until recent times.
Murgon's Stewart Heights is named for the Stewart family.

The ``Chat'' continues:

\begin{quote}
`A portion of Barambah Station\ldots was resumed, and during 1906 these
areas were thrown open for selection in the Wondai Lands Office. All the
forest areas were selected, but very few of the scrub blocks were taken
up -- the latter were reserved for `English settlers, or for home
people'\ldots{} (Mr Arnell) selected 212 acres of land within sight of
the railway station on the eastern side of the line\ldots{} (and later)
purchased two other selections \ldots for dairying and farming\ldots(In
his prophetic words) `Murgon is on the verge of big things.'
\end{quote}

The expansive width of Lamb Street, Murgon's main street, can be
directly attributed to the harvesting of timber in the area in these
formative years. Bullock teams were used as transport and needed plenty
of space to manoeuvre with their precious cargo en-route to the rail
head.

Realising the potential of the district the Murgon Progress Association
was formed in 1906 with George Arnell as Chairman and with a membership
of around 35. That first year also saw the establishment of Maddison's
hotel, Angel's butcher's shop, Grey's grocery store and Witt's
blacksmith's shop. Within two years the Association had secured 10 acres
reserved for school ground purposes, reserves for show grounds, a mail
service to Windera settlement 20 miles away, medical attendance at
Barambah Settlement and a goods shed at the railway station.\footnote{`A
  Chat with George Arnell'\emph{, Daily Mail,} 18 April 1922, p.10}

Arnell's `Chat' has a section headed `Early Day's Benefactress', a Mrs F
L Fick who, prior to the availability of doctors, pharmacies or any form
or first aid or bush nursing, including midwifery, saw to these needs in
the district (many of whom were Church of England) and {[}in Arnell's
words{]} she was really the ``Mother of Murgon''. She is quoted as
having `a good knowledge of medicines and first aid generally. Her
services were frequently called upon \ldots{} she has been known to ride
30 miles on horseback through the night to attend some needy cases
\ldots{} was looked upon as a general benefactress and although on the
verge of 61 years (in 1922) still carries on the good work with
successful results. For the first 5 years of Murgon, before the coming
of a doctor, Mrs Fick had not one fatal case.'

The Fick family's property was located on the banks of Barambah Creek
between Murgon and Wondai. The road bridge was built nearby to replace
the former Fick's Crossing\emph{,} a natural shallower part of Barambah
Creek. In later years, the large water hole and a portion of the
original Fick property became a popular recreation area. Substantial
facilities were constructed, and an area allocated as Fick's Crossing
Park\emph{.} Used extensively over the years as a convention centre,
out-door education centre, a venue for church functions and camps,
swimming and canoe activities, and even Sun Girl and Miss Queensland
beauty competitions. In more recent years it was utilized by Silver
Wattle Foundation as an indigenous training centre for First Nation
youth from the area. Lining centre for First Nation youth from the area.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{A Permanent Place of
Worship}

\section{1913--1914 : Rev John Howard
Steer}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.3\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.28\textwidth,right]{images/JHSteer.png}
\caption{Rev J H Steer}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Nanango curate, Rev J H Steer, was entrusted with the care of Murgon and
the surrounding area, from Wondai to Sexton including Boonara, Mondure,
the small settlement at Murgon, and Kilkivan, until 1914. He travelled
by horseback from Nanango.\footnote{\emph{A Tapestry in Faith --} St
  David's, Boonara, Centenary Booklet, 1914, pp. 11, 12.} Rev Steer
diligently brought the various sacraments to central homesteads or
private homes. For example, on 3\textsuperscript{rd} January 1914 he
solemnized the marriage of Lilly Bull to Leonard Hatchett at
``Eailsdon'', the residence of Mr George Hatchett.\footnote{Personal
  Communication, Shirley Dennien, great grand-daughter.}

Rev Steer is remembered as a great church builder. During his time in
the parish, sites were obtained for three new church buildings. Boonara
church opened in 1914. The new building swung into action, hosting its
first wedding (Idalia Constance Nissen to Oscar Sidney Wallace) on 7
January with Rev Steer officiating. While construction of the current
church building in Goomeri began during Rev Steer's incumbency, the
completed Church of the Epiphany, was officially dedicated on 12 March
1916, by Archbishop St Clair Alfred Donaldson.\footnote{Parish of
  Kilkivan, \emph{Family Magazine}, June 1986 which carried a reprint of
  articles from \emph{Our Parish Magazine}, April 1916.}




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.8\textwidth,center]{images/hatchettBull1914.png}
\caption{Marriage of Lilly Bull to Leonard Hatchett, 1914}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


When one considers that World War I was raging in Europe and that most
of the settlers who had their ancestral roots firmly planted there, had
family members in fighting overseas in support, it is a remarkable
effort that the labour-strapped Australian settlers were able to bring
two church buildings into being.

One of the earliest records of Diocesan involvement by parishioners from
this area, is the nomination in 1914 of Richard Maudsley, a grazier of
\emph{Undaban} and a parishioner from Boonara, as a synodsman for the
1915 Synod in Brisbane. An entry for Nanango Parish in the 1916 Year
Book lists R Maudsley and E Schneider (Boonara) and I Moore (Goomeri) as
Wardens for their centres. B Graham and R Maudsley are listed as
Synodsmen.\footnote{Church of England, Brisbane Diocese, \emph{Year
  Book,}1919 - 1927.} Thus, it is evident that the Church of England had
a strong and vigorous foundation in the whole district surrounding
Murgon as well as in the town area itself.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.5\textwidth,center]{images/RichardMaudsleyAndWifeMariaJane.jpg}
\caption{Richard and Maria Maudsley}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


\section{Smaller Dependencies}

Several small dependencies are mentioned as centres of worship in the
early years. Some of these a recorded in small cameos in the Kilkivan
Centenary Booklet.

\subsection{Cinnabar}

Cinnabar is named as the first centre outside Kilkivan. It is believed
that services started as far back as 1898 and were conducted in the
afternoon in the front room of the home of Mr and Mrs T Standen, their
daughter, Grace, playing the piano for the hymns. In 1912 Rev Steer
wrote an article on the 20 September celebration of the Standen's Silver
Wedding anniversary. In 1925 the Cinnabar Hall was built, and services
were held there. Mr Standen and, later on, Mr L Sempf were prominent in
church activities and administrative positions. Regular church services
at Cinnabar ceased in the early 1930s thus during Rev Lee Warner's
incumbency.\footnote{St Mathew's Kilkivan\emph{, Centenary Booklet,} p.
  24.}

\subsection{Fat Hen Creek}

Residents of Fat Hen Creek also held services, the first of these being
held in 1921 during Rev Shand's time as vicar. Services were held in the
local Rossmore school -- two per month, one Church of England and the
other Methodist. Local resident, Mrs Waldock, conducted Sunday School in
her Black Snake Road home, just over the hill from Rossmore school.
Ministers sometimes stayed overnight at the home of Mrs A Dimock. Church
Chronicle notes of April 1937, when Rev Lee Warner was vicar, mention
the Rossmore Ladies Guild. Service ceased in 1942, most likely as a
result of war-time petrol allowance restrictions which hindered Rev
Griffith's travels.\footnote{St Mathew's Kilkivan\emph{, Centenary
  Booklet,} p. 26.}

\subsection{Woolooga}

Rev Steer conducted regular services at Woolooga in the original (old)
hall from 1913 although services and weddings had been conducted in
private homes for many years prior. During Rev Eglinton's time as vicar,
the September 1930 Parish Notes recorded that land for a church on a
`prominent and valuable site' which Diocesan records describe it as
`Vacant land. Subdivision Two of Portion 152, County Lennox, Parish of
Brooyar, given by R C Hall of Woolooga about 1931 for use as a church'.

There were optimistic ambitions for a church and vicarage and apparent
great faith in the future of the area. A committee was formed with
office bearers named as `Mr R C Hall, J McMullen (school teacher), and
George Wilson (station master). Plans were drawn under the guidance and
advice of Archdeacon Glover with details of timbers to be used in its
structure and for finishing details. Financial assistance was sought
through Diocesan channels. However, this was not forthcoming due to `the
stringent state of diocesan finances.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence
  files, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane.} Sadly, their optimism did not
bear fruit. The church was never built and services were discontinued in
1933, when Rev J Lee Warner was vicar.\footnote{St Mathew's
  Kilkivan\emph{, Centenary Booklet,} p. 25.}

By 1965, following a letter from Kilkivan Shire Council's Mr E Keating
regarding possible foreclosure due to overdue rates of \$12.93, serious
consideration was being given to selling the site, Diocesan advice the
parish wardens was that , `If Mr Hall is still alive, we would like you
to obtain his views on a proposed sale.' Finally, in 1971, following the
parish's formal application through its parish secretary, Mr Frank
Horrocks, for `permission to sell' the land to Mr J H Cullis (Cullen?)
for \$40, the land passed out of church hands.

From 1905 to 1912, clergymen from St Andrew's One Mile, Gympie provided
services for Sexton Anglicans, on their way to Kilkivan. Minutes of a
meeting on 15 March 1911 show that the parish was willing to pay \pounds7/10/-
for a horse for the curate, Rev J H Steer. Mr Steer transferred to
Nanango in 1913 and owing to boundary changes, Sexton was still in his
area. Services were held in Carmyle School (at its original site). Mr
Dave Culley was a warden. Rev Lee Warner is credited as asking for
Sexton and Woolooga go be transferred back to Gympie,\footnote{St
  Mathew's Kilkivan\emph{, Centenary Booklet,} p. 28.} however, this did
not eventuate.

\section{1915--1919 : The Great War}

During these troubled years, curates from Nanango, including Rev C G B
Turner and Rev C C H James\emph{,} had the option of a `push bike' --
apparently, a short-lived venture.\footnote{St Mathew's Kilkivan\emph{,
  Centenary Booklet, p. 6}} In Murgon, church services were held
irregularly in the home of George and Charlotte Arnell. Later they were
conducted in the Salvation Army Hall. Caleb Houghton's name occurs as a
Salvation Army Officer.\footnote{Personal Communication, Jeff and Muriel
  Schultz, Murgon residents.}

\section{1919--1922 : Rev Rupert Warner
Shand}

In the years immediately preceding the arrival of Rev Shand, the support
for a permanent Church of England worship centre in Murgon gained
momentum, coinciding with a proposal for separation from Nanango Parish.
A separate parish for the area called The Parochial District of Murgon
was officially formed on 1 February 1919, comprising Murgon, Wondai,
Mondure, Sexton, Abbeywood, Silverleaf, West Goomeri, Kilkivan, Boonara,
Goomeri, Cinnabar, Fat Hen Creek and Barambah Mission.\footnote{Church
  of England, Brisbane Diocese, \emph{Year Book,}1919 - 1927.}

At the time Rev Shand took up his position as vicar of this new parish
the Parish Burial Register's very first entry reads `\emph{1. Ethel
Maria McIntosh, Boonara, Goomeri -- Married Woman -- (Age) 19 -- died 23
January 1919, buried 24 January 1919.'} Ethel was the daughter of
Richard and Maria Maudsley, \emph{Undaban}. Robert and Ethel's first
child, Joyce Ethel McIntosh was born at Murgon on 16 January 1919. Ethel
did not recover from the birth and she died a week later, on 23 January
1919.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.6\textwidth,center]{images/graveOfEthelMcIntoshInGoomeriCemetery.jpg}
\caption{Grave Of Ethel McIntosh In Goomeri Cemetery}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


Following a service conducted by Reverend Rupert Wagner Shand in
Goomeri's Church of the Epiphany, she was buried at Goomeri Cemetery.
Her headstone is topped by a broken column indicating that she died in
the prime of her life.\footnote{\emph{Ordinary People Extraordinary
  Lives,} p. 357; Drawing of Grave and Headstone or Ethel McIntosh --
  Courtesy Janine Seltzer.} Entry 2 lists the funeral of James Henry
Black (45) of Murgon, died 27\textsuperscript{th} and buried 28 January
1919. Thus, Rev Shand's services were called upon as soon as he arrived
and prior to the official formation.

A house, originally built in Gympie was demolished and re-erected in
Murgon, then rented as a vicarage for the Rev R W Shand.\footnote{JE
  Murphy and EW Easton, \emph{Wilderness to Wealth: being a history of
  the shires of Nanango, Kingaroy, Wondai, Murgon, Kilkivan and the
  Upper Yarraman portion of the Rosalie Shire, 1850-1950}, Brisbane, WR
  Smith \& Patterson, 1950, repr. 1974, p. 418. \emph{Wilderness to
  Wealth}, p. 418.} The first meeting of the Parochial Council was held
in this residence on Tuesday, 11 February 1919 at 8 p.m.\footnote{Anglican
  Church Southern Queensland, Diocesan Archives, Murgon Parish Minutes,
  DJ Box 3.} Attendance is shown as Messrs Pimlott, McDonald, G Black, J
Faunce, L Smith, G Willis and C E Baldwin -- names that have remained
synonymous with the formation of the parish.

Items dealt with included the basic requirements for the running of the
parish: set of books for recording purposes, the opening of a Queensland
Savings Bank account for the Parochial Funds, the appointment by
consensus of a warden (Mr Pimlott is named) and a treasurer to oversee
the running of the parish until the more formal arrangement of
nominations and election at the Easter Meeting (a general meeting of
parishioners). The suggested allocation of monetary contributions from
the various outlying centres was to be communicated to the various
centres by circular letter.

The vicar was delegated to \emph{`}meet with the ladies in connection
with the forming of a Society of the Treasury to canvass the town and
district\emph{'} Thus, from the very first meeting the tradition of
utilizing the value of women in the mundane duties of raising monies for
parish funds was clearly recognized.

At this first Parochial Council meeting Warden Pimlott (Mondure) moved:
that the Council is of the opinion that for the proper working of the
Parish a motor car be purchased and that parishioners be appointed with
regard to guaranteeing or otherwise -- a quite remarkable and
commendable decision in these early post-war years. It was seconded by
Mr McDonald. The purchasing committee comprised Messrs McDonald, Faunce
and Smith. This was followed up at the March meeting with a request for
all centres to actively engage in raising funds for this purpose. From
the very beginning, the matter of adequate finance years was prominent
at all council meetings. The 11 March meeting resolved that the stipend
be \pounds20-16-8 and that a sum of \pounds50/year be paid for the vicar's traveling
expenses.\footnote{Anglican Church Southern Queensland, Diocesan
  Archives, Murgon Parish Minutes, DJ Box 3}

The Easter (or Annual General) Meeting was held on the evening of 8 May
1919 in the Murgon School of Arts, Archdeacon Rivers in the chair.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Rev Shand gave a glowing report of progress in the first two months.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  In the absence of treasurer Mr Jarvis, his report was presented by Mr
  Standen who formally moved its adoption.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Formal Election of Officers: Wardens: Mr Pimlott (Vicar's
  appointment); Mr McKell (Peoples Warden -from six nominations); Parish
  Councillors (nine members): Wills, Winter, Baldwin, Crocker, and Haig
  and Vicar's Appointments -- Messrs James, Faunce and Standen.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  New Parochial Council members appointed to positions were Mr Jones
  (treasurer); Messrs Hampshire and R Maudsley as synod representatives
  - Mr Maudsley having been in this position since his appointment in
  1914.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Archdeacon Rivers was entrusted with the task of defining the parish
  boundaries to include Tingoora.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Request for Mondure's earlier assessment amount be reduced from \pounds70 to
  \pounds50 with other centres to make up the difference.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Revised Assessments:
  \end{quote}

  \begin{itemize}
  \item
    Murgon \pounds64;
  \item
    Kilkivan \pounds53-10-0;
  \item
    Boonara \pounds40;
  \item
    Wondai \pounds35;
  \item
    Mondure \pounds58;
  \item
    Sexton \pounds12;
  \item
    Overseas \pounds12;
  \item
    Tingoora \pounds12\textbf{;}
  \item
    \textbf{TOTAL} \pounds326-10-0.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  It appears the church was carrying an overdraft as a motion to form a
  committee to reduce same was put and carried.
  \end{quote}
\item
  \begin{quote}
  Two representatives to be appointed from each centre to guarantee
  quota required for purchase of a car.
  \end{quote}
\end{itemize}

Diocesan records confirm that the `tyranny of distance' continued as a
very prominent issue in the early years of settlement, with horses
playing a significant part, though subsequently supported by the use of
push bikes and even a motorcycle.\footnote{St Mathew's Kilkivan\emph{,
  Centenary Booklet.}} It remained so as Rev Shand began his ministry in
Murgon.

The August Parish Council Minutes included:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Rev Shand's list of expenses:

  \begin{itemize}
  \item
    Horse hire 5/-;
  \item
    Benzine \pounds1-1-0;
  \item
    Repairs 16/-;
  \item
    Season Tickets \pounds1-13-6\textbf{;}
  \item
    \textbf{TOTAL} \pounds3-15-6
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Progress in the transport area underwent a great leap forward with the
  vicar happily reporting the sale of a motorcycle for \pounds27-10-0 and
  Sulky and Harness for \pounds18-0-0.
\item
  Rev Shand then announced that he had `purchased a motor vehicle for
  \pounds165, terms being \pounds75 deposit with the balance in instalments'. The
  meeting endorsed his proactive actions regarding sale and purchase
  decisions.
\item
  More money-raising efforts were discussed at length with a decision
  taken to hold a Ball in September with proceeds to a Car Fund --
  tickets 5/- and 3/-.
\end{itemize}

The horse and bicycle era was upgraded and a model T Ford,
`affectionately' known as a `Tin Lizzie', or, more likely, Model A - a
great improvement on the `T' - was purchased.

Apart from recording relevant official details, the services register
often contained interesting facts which throw light on the often harsh
conditions under which these ministers toiled. One such early entry
notes: `No Service, rode horse, roads awful!' I imagine the poor man
would have felt rather frustrated that after making such an effort, no
one else turned up. A little later he recorded `Very wet. No Service',
and again a little further down, `Creeks flooded'. 12 November 1919
services register again endorsed the actions of Rev Shand in purchasing
a replacement car for \pounds215 -- a confirmation of the effect of poor the
condition of roads and the general travel conditions of the day.

Even with all the difficulties presented to the vicar and his flock, a
choir had been mustered in Murgon and regular practice meetings were
held. The 12 November 1919 minutes record a resolution `that choir
practice be withdrawn from the School of Arts and that the chairman
arrange a place of practicing'. No explanation for the move was
recorded.

Great steps forward had been achieved in this short eight-month period
and the wheels of progress continued to gain momentum. Plans and
specifications were drawn by architects, WH Atkinson, Adelaide Street,
Brisbane. An article about calling tenders for construction of the
church appeared in the \emph{Maryborough Chronicle, Wide Bay and Burnett
Advertiser} on 7 August 1919 and the advertisement calling the tenders
on 8 August 1919:

\begin{quote}
TENDERS are called for the ERECTION and COMPLETION of proposed CHURCH OF
ENGLAND, MURGON (labour only). Lowest or any Tender not necessarily
accepted. Tenders close SATURDAY, 23 August, 1919. Plan and
Specifications may be seen at MR.W. R. CLARKE'S, Newsagents Agent,
Murgon. Tenders to be addressed to W. H. PIMLOTT, Secretary Building
Committee, Box 68, Murgon.
\end{quote}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.6\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.58\textwidth,right]{images/churchPlans.jpg}
\caption{Church Plans}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Sourcing land at an affordable price was proving to be a
stumbling-block. Most generously, George Arnell purchased and donated
the land for the building of this much anticipated Murgon Church of
England. A bank loan was taken out to cover building costs. `Dick'
Maudsley (nephew of the previously mentioned, Richard) signed an
agreement to `go guarantor'. From the Maudsley Family history, the
picture emerges of a very hard working and generous man.\footnote{\emph{Ordinary
  People, Extraordinary Lives}, p. 143} Although his purchase of one of
the first motor cars in the area earned him the unkind title of `Flash
Dick', his open-handedness and faith through this sharing his prosperity
were then clearly revealed. Local bank manager and church member, Mr
Skyring, on learning of his decision, in obvious dismay, anxiously
confronted Mr Maudsley. ``How on earth did you let yourself get talked
into that, Dick?'' and was told, ``It's for the Church. It is all OK!''
Though no amount is mentioned here, later evidence reports estimated
cost at \pounds900.

The builders, Wills and Haigh, commenced construction work very
promptly.\footnote{Christ Church Parish Council Minutes, May 1920.
  (Diocesan Archives DJ 3 Box 3)} Everything was `by hand', from the
sourcing of mill logs in the local area and the milling of same to the
coal-face jobs of digging trenches and post holes with crow-bar and
shovel, hand-sawing every board piece as required, to the hammering in
of every single nail. When one takes into account that this is the
period immediately following World War 1 and amidst an influenza
pandemic and remembering the shortage of labour and materials, the
progress of building works was astounding as recorded and confirmed by
entries in minutes. Everything purchased was let to tender even to basic
items such as the supply of nails.

In the short one-month period from the calling of tenders in early
August the work had progressed to a point where the next important
milestone could be celebrated. On 9 September 1919 Archbishop Donaldson
`crowned the foundation block of the Murgon's new church. It is
anticipated that the church will cost about \pounds900, provision being made
for future enlargement.'\footnote{Anglican Church Notes printed in the
  Brisbane \emph{Telegraph,} 13 September 1919, p. 16.} For the
remainder of September the vicar was away on leave of
absence.'\footnote{Church of England, Brisbane Diocese, \emph{Year
  Book,} 1919 -- 1927 and the Service Register.} These visionary and
intrepid early movers and shakers are to be congratulated for their
foresight, dedicated support and faith for the remarkable achievements
of 1919.

Of note is the marriage of Clarence Edward (Jack) Morgan to Daisy Ellen
Bull (sister of the afore- mentioned Lilly (Bull) Hatchett) on 10
September 1920, again at her parents' Abbeywood home, just one day after
celebrating the church's stump-capping a century ago. Rev Shand
performed the ceremony.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/dedicationByBishopLeFanu.jpg}
\caption{Dedicated by Bishop Le Fanu}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


As the building process neared completion, a date for Christ Church's
dedication was set and a call went out to parishioners for funds to
employ further labour for a last-minute push. The volunteers who gave so
promptly and generously in time, energy and dedication, through both
on-site and behind-the-scenes support, are to be congratulated for
bringing this major project so speedily to fruition. The building was
completed in record time and dedicated by Bishop Le Fanu on Sunday, 18
April 1920 in the presence of a large congregation from all parts of the
district. The church was reported to be `commodious and decidedly
attractive in appearance, both externally and internally. After the
dedication service luncheon was provided by the Women's Guild and the
annual Easter Meeting was held.'\footnote{Brisbane \emph{Telegraph,} 24
  April 1920 p. 10.} Thus, Mr Maudsley's generous and seemingly (in some
eyes) rash decision was totally vindicated.




\begin{wrapfigure}{L}{.4\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.38\textwidth,right]{images/georgeAnneWaldock.png}
\caption{George and Anne Waldock}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


One of the attractive internal fittings was a silky oak altar and altar
rails hand crafted and provided for the new church building by local
citizen, George Waldock Jnr, (son of Nick Waldock, one of the earliest
blacksmiths in Murgon) who continued in his father's trade. Although
later replaced by an ornately carved altar, Waldock's generous and
attractive altar remains in active worship service within the parish as
the altar in St David's church, Boonara.\footnote{Ross Waldock's
  information re the altar by Geo Waldock.}

A successful flower show was held in early December 1920 over both
afternoon and evening, in Murgon as a fundraiser, in aid of the Church
of England with exhibits coming from Tingoora to Kilkivan, thus from all
areas of the parish.

It noted the `wonderful display of flowers'\emph{.} There was an
extensive list of categories for individual varieties including seven
sections for various coloured roses, plus Chrysanthemums, Cactus
Dahlias, Carnations, Asters, Cannas, Phlox, Stocks (single and double),
Verbenas, Petunias, Nasturtiums, Dianthus, Sunflower, Gladiolus, Sweet
Peas, Gerberas, and various flower collections, even including
`Wildflowers' (which would have included Paper Daisies which were
plentiful in the area). The prize for best head of Sunflower was awarded
to Mrs R W Shand.

Other sections included a Pot Plant section, various forms of bouquets,
floral bowls and artistic displays and a very extensive sections for
vegetables, locally grown fruit, eggs, butter (salted and unsalted)
which were all very well supported.

As usual with country affairs, there was a huge baking section, many and
varied handcrafts such as knitting and crocheting and drawn thread work.
Artwork included water and oil paintings, sketching, photographic
section (landscape and portrait) and wood carving.

The children were not forgotten either, with schoolwork such as mapping,
school exercise book, handwriting, artwork, dressed doll, sewing items
including samplers and a garment made by a child.

Takings from the Flower Show amounted to \pounds60 -- a very satisfactory
result. A dance in the evening terminated a very successful
event.\footnote{\emph{Daily Mail,} 11 December 1920, p. 4.}This event
seems to foreshadow the subsequent Agricultural and Horticultural Show
Societies so popular in these rural towns.




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.3\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.28\textwidth,right]{images/waldocksBlacksmithShopMurgon1913.png}
\caption{Waldock's Blacksmith Shop, Murgon, ca. 1913}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


The Parish of Murgon records show a total of 14 centres being served,
including St George's Tingoora and its dedication on 3 April 1921,
though inclusion in parish activities occurred at least as early as 1920
as the above article indicates.\footnote{Church of England, Brisbane
  Diocese, \emph{Year Book,} 1919 -- 1927.}

Diocesan Records contain a type-written letter dated 05 April 1921, (as
below), indicating Rev R Willand served during Rev Shand's period of
incumbency and the exponential growth in the parish during this
period.\footnote{Anglican Church Southern Queensland, Diocesan Archives,
  Murgon Parish Correspondence.}

\emph{`Your Grace,}

\emph{At the Easter Meeting held at Murgon on Sunday
3\textsuperscript{rd} April the following resolution, which was proposed
by Mr E. J. McConnell and seconded by Mr J. H. Saville, was carried
unanimously: `That representation be made to His Grace the Archbishop
for the appointment of an Assistant Curate and that this meeting
strongly urge the appointment of same.'}

\emph{We would respectfully point out to your Grace that the Parish has
grown in the last two years and many new centres have been formed. The
size of the Parish is far too great for one man and in consequence some
important work has to be left undone and also many centres ought to be
having regular services whereas at the present they can have only one
service a month. We feel sure that if no help is forthcoming, we shall
lose many people simply through lack of services and all the good work
done in the past will be lost.}

\emph{The Archdeacon was present at the meeting and he informed the
meeting that there were no men available in the Diocese. If you cannot
give us an Assistant would you have any objections to the Vicar
advertising in the South for another man?'}

\emph{We are}

\emph{Your Grace}

\emph{Yours obediently}

\emph{R Willand Vicar}

\emph{George A Wood Vicar's Warden}

\emph{S Trudgian Peoples Warden'}

The Murgon Parish Magazine, November-December 1922 with R W Shand listed
as vicar carries an. advertisement for Cole and Trudgion -- Dentists,
Murgon. Mrs Trudgion, was the wife of peoples warden, S Trudgion.
Although many variations of spelling occur throughout various records,
the `ion' ending is in the advertisement and on a sign in a
photograph.\footnote{Murgon Parish, \emph{Family Magazine,}
  November-December, 1922.}




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.95\textwidth,center]{images/officeBearers1922.jpg}
\caption{ Office bearers - 1922}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


Regular run of service entries followed with no signatures against them.

Rev Shand's last service in the parish was conducted on 26 December
1922, the Feast of St Stephen, at Kilkivan at 9.00am with 16
communicants. A great vote of thanks is due to him for steering the ship
of progress to the position the worship centre in Murgon, and indeed the
entire parish, was in at the end of his tenure. Well done, Rev Shand.

\begin{quote}
\end{quote}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1923--1925 : Rev Cyril Horswell
Massey}

Rev Massey (1886-1969) assumed duties in Murgon on 01 January 1923 after
having served in several places throughout Australia, including the
Northern Territory from where on 11 December 1916 he took leave while
Chaplain to the Australian Imperial Forces. On arrival in Murgon, this
large, far-flung parish must have appeared like another battle-front to
him, though no doubt thankful for the favourable position in which he
found it.

Rev Massey conducted his first round of services on 7 January --
Epiphany 1 -- being 8.00 am Kilkivan Holy Communion -- 4 communicants;
11.00am Kilkivan HC -- 8 communicants; 3.00pm Fat Hen Creek Evensong;
7.30pm Goomeri Evensong. The following entry of 14 January showing
services of Holy Communion at Murgon, 7.30 m and Mondure 10.30am
followed by Evensong at Tingoora and Wondai (3.00pm and 7.30pm),
indicates his desire to become familiar with all the centres under his
care as soon as possible.\footnote{Diocesan Archives, Murgon Parish
  Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2}

The test of endurance of the regular round of four services each Sunday
continued, settling into a regular pattern with the main centres
receiving attention most Sundays and the outlying smaller ones being
catered for once or twice a month, and often around 8.00pm on
weeknights, probably to cater for the largely dairy-farming
congregation.

On 21 January 1923 two services were conducted in Murgon by Archdeacon
Edward C Osbourne. Rev C H Massey was officially inducted as vicar of
Murgon following the 7.30am Holy Communion service and followed by a
second HC service at 11.00am. The day continued with Rev Massey
conducting a 3.00pm Evensong at Silverleaf and 7.30pm at Murgon while
Archdeacon Osbourne officiated at evensong services -- 3.00pm, Boonara,
followed by 7.30pm, Goomeri.\footnote{Diocesan Archives, Murgon Parish
  Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2}

A \emph{Daily Mail} newspaper report on 26 April 1923 carried a summary
of the first general Easter meeting of the parish with Rev C H Massey
presiding. Messrs E Bromhall and S Trudgion were elected as peoples and
vicars wardens, with Mr H Sanderson as treasurer and Messrs Maudsley
(Boonara) and Hampshire (Mondure) as Synodsmen.\footnote{\emph{Daily
  Mail,} Brisbane, 26 April 1923}

A Coin Evening was held at Mrs K Nicholl's residence `to raise funds to
scrub and clean the Murgon Church in preparation for Bishop Le Fanu's
impending visit'. The article mentioned that guests also played cards,
and were involved in singing, dancing and `home games'. An impromptu
`musical choir competition'' with a prize of a silver tray added to the
evening's enjoyment.\footnote{\emph{Daily Mail,} Brisbane, 15 November
  1923}

Four services of Confirmation were provided by Bishop Le Fanu over the
weekend of his visit during which 103 new church members received the
sacrament. Arriving on Saturday 17 November, an evening, the first of
these services was conducted in Kilkivan. Murgon and Cherbourg followed
on Sunday and his busy weekend concluded in Goomeri on Monday 19
November. During his stay in the parish his hosts were Mr and Mrs S
Trudgion at their `\emph{St Austel'} residence.\footnote{\emph{Daily
  Mail, Brisbane, 23 November 1923, p. 8}}

The \emph{Daily Mail}, Brisbane, 9 May 1924 presented a summary of the
preceding year's events as presented by Rev Massey at the parish AGM.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The total services were 312 of which 121 were Holy Communion, with
  1470 communicants -- compared with the previous year's 344 services
  (during portion of which two clergymen were able to officiate) of
  which 123 were HC, with1212 communicants.
\item
  The Easter communions were attended by 173 parishioners, compared with
  129 the previous year.
\item
  Collections were \pounds194.12s. 6d. The financial statement showed that
  everything was in a very satisfactory position. It was decided that
  the treasurer should write to all centres asking that a special
  donation of \pounds5 over and above the assessment should be raised and
  forwarded to clear the overdraft and amounts outstanding. The stipend
  and care assessments are to remain the same as last year.
\item
  Mr S Trudgion was appointed vicars warden, Mr David L Jones of
  Kilkivan, peoples warden; Mr I Holland, manager of the Queensland
  Bank, was appointed parish treasurer and Messrs Faunce and Carr were
  elected auditors.\footnote{\emph{Daily Mail, Brisbane, 9 May 1924}}
\end{itemize}

Whilst the building phase had been complete during Reg Shand's
incumbency, a Building Fund debt still needed addressing in 1924.
Brisbane's \emph{Daily Mail,} 11 June, carried a Church Notes report of
the Guild holding a very successful refreshment booth at the Murgon
Show. \pounds58 was raised to help address this deficit.\footnote{\emph{Daily
  Mail, Brisbane, 11 June 1924}}

The extent of the area and the distances involved in travel by clergy in
these years, often in difficult circumstances and unforgiving terrain is
confirmed in \emph{The Queenslander}. The report stated that Rev
Massey's duties required travel of 1000 miles per month over an area of
5000 square miles -- a remarkable test of endurance for both the man and
his motor vehicle.\footnote{\emph{The Queenslander, Brisbane, 18 October
  1924}}

An article in \emph{Queensland Times}, Ipswich, 30 November 1924, a
missional film was shown:

`At Christ Church (Church of England), Murgon, last Sunday evening, a
moving picture, entitled \emph{The Heart of New Guinea} was screened.'
This film proved to be one of the Australian Board of Missions (ABM)
best promotional works and was equally well received in Murgon. Produced
from footage shot by Captain Hurley, the visit was in aid of funds for
the China Mission project\emph{.} The gathering was addressed by a Rev A
R B Burnett a former missionary in China, prior to the showing overseen
by ABMs H A Spencer.\footnote{\emph{The Queensland Times,} Ipswich, 30
  November 1924}

Weddings were always large and happily anticipated events in local
communities. They received good coverage as positive newspaper articles.
The \emph{Queenslander} newspaper carried a detailed report of the
wedding of Norman Dennien to Elsie Pokarier, solemnised at Christ Church
Murgon by Rev Massey, and naming sister of the bride, Laura, and sister
of the groom, Eileen, as bridesmaids, with Cyril Dennien and Cecil
Pokarier as best man and groomsman. The bride's attire was described as
white voile, inlet with guipure lace, and finished with pin-tucks and
beads. Her veil, which was kindly lent by Mrs Bick (Windera), was
arranged with orange blossoms (and) \ldots she carried a bouquet of
white chrysanthemums and roses. The bridesmaids were frocked alike in
pink voile, adorned with lace and pin tucks\ldots both wore caps to
match. All bouquets were made from flowers grown in the beautiful garden
of the bridegroom's parents. A spacious barn on the Dennien property,
beautifully decorated with pink and white streamers ferns and flowers,
and a large wedding bell, provided the venue for the wedding breakfast
for the 120 guests. Mr and Mrs Dennien left next day by motor for
Murgon, en route for the South and Boonah where the honeymoon will be
spent. The bride's travelling frock was of saxe-blue silk poplin,
adorned with fur.\footnote{\emph{The Queenslander,} Brisbane 16 May 1925
  \emph{The Queenslander,} Brisbane 16 May 1925 \emph{The Queenslander,}
  Brisbane 16 May 1925

  \emph{The Queenslander,} Brisbane 16 May 1925}

The 1925 services register shows that Bishop Le Fanu again visited the
parish to administer the rite of Confirmation for 28 candidates - Monday
16 November in Goomeri (6 boys, 6 girls) and Tuesday 17 November at St
Faith's, Mondure (9 boys, 7 girls).\footnote{Diocesan Archives, Murgon
  Parish Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2}

Rev Massey's period of incumbency in the parish ended on 31 December
1925. When one considers that his time in the parish efforts would have
been seriously impacted by the depression following WW1, it is much to
his credit that he left behind a smoothly working parish and went
forward to a position as rector of St Paul's, Cleveland, commencing 1
January 1926.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1926--1928 : Rev Ernest Henry
Smith}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.3\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.28\textwidth,right]{images/EHSmith.png}
\caption{Rev E H Smith}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Excerpts from Mrs Alison Coomber's book on the life of her father,
titled `A GREAT BLOKE: The Life of Ernest Henry Smith,'\footnote{\emph{A
  GREAT BLOKE: The Life of Ernest Henry Smith --} compiled by his
  daughter, Mrs Alison Coomber. (Used with permission)} gives a
first-hand insight into conditions for clergy at that time. This book is
an important resource for anyone interested in the conditions, trials
and tribulations as well as the joy of service to God in Rural
Queensland, and indeed Australia, in these early closer-settlement
years.

In her Foreword, Mrs Coomber gives an insight into the man himself.
`\ldots he was \ldots{} kind, intelligent, loving, fun, not judgmental
and very slow to anger \ldots{} always very quick to see and appreciate
the inherent good in people.' He appears to be the perfect example of
not just a Great Bloke but a Great Priest as well, even though, `many
years ago, my father was described to me as `a great bloke, but a bit
long-winded.'

In 1926 it was announced in the Diocesan periodical \emph{Church
Chronicle} that he had been appointed on promotion, as Vicar of Murgon
with the parish described as being a relatively new one, large in area
but small in population. Murgon could hardly have been more different
from bustling Maryborough. One redeeming factor was that his wife,
Molly, had been a pupil-teacher there in 1916 and was familiar with the
area.

`As well as the main church at Murgon, there were six smaller
congregations at Boonara, Wondai, Goomeri, Kilkivan, Mondure and
Tingoora with five even smaller dependencies for Ernie to administer to
\ldots{} Abbeywood, Fat Hen Creek, Cinnabar, Proston and Barambah
Settlement (later named Cherbourg) thus 12 in total. So, the Parish of
Murgon in those days was a real test of endurance and strength for its
Vicar, whose stipend was more than a Curate's but less than a
Priest's\ldots{} When they first arrived at Murgon, they had no stipend
for three months, and must have been living literally hand-to-mouth. Not
an easy task for a pair of newly-weds.' Letters held in the Diocesan
Archives in Brisbane, confirm (rather curtly at times) that the decision
made by Wardens of the area in 1914 to advance monies on an
end-of-quarter basis was not in accordance with Diocesan wishes but was
most firmly and determinedly adhered to by the locals and was still in
effect, Parish-wide over 10 years later.\footnote{\emph{A Tapestry in
  Faith --} St David's, Boonara, Centenary, 2014} The Smiths were also
in grief following the stillbirth of their first child, Beth.

Added to these stresses, the area was feeling the effects of the
depression following World War One. Funds were short in all areas and
support of the church suffered the consequences as well. However, with
his characteristic enthusiasm Ernie threw himself into his duties. The
test of endurance is obvious as services register covering his first
weeks in the parish confirm that he managed to travel to every one of
the twelve centres at least once.

Murgon 1926: 10 January service register states: `No Service. Vicar
ill.\emph{'} 13 January: `Induction as Vicar, Officiant the Rural Dean
(J E\emph{)}\footnote{Diocesan Archives -- Murgon Parish Minutes -- DJ
  Box3}\emph{-} Rev Joseph Elliott who was rector of Maryborough at the
time.

`\ldots eight lines written in Ernie's neat handwriting record the
Easter meeting on 23 April 1926, a few months after he began work there.
There were six people in attendance, not exactly a large gathering.
Besides the Vicar were the Vicars Warden and the Peoples Warden, the
Parish Treasurer and two others.' Page 40 identifies the two Wardens as
being the same two faithful parishioners - Mr J S Mills as People's
Warden and Mr S Trudgion as Vicar's Warden. The Treasurer is not
identified.

The financial position appears to have been a matter of ongoing concern
with the necessity to `raise funds by various means. The Women's Guild
frequently `\ldots came to the rescue\ldots' Mrs Coomber

continues from the minutes, that the only business dealt with was the
discussion and adoption of the balance sheet, and the Women's Guild was
thanked for their contribution of \pounds450 to meet the building fund debt.

Guild assistance was called upon several more times over the next couple
of years. Fund raising ventures included canvassing the district for
contributions to organizing and holding a children's Ball in an effort
to meet the diocesan assessment quota and to reduce the bank overdraft
to under \pounds100.

Obviously, there continued to be a very active group of women in the
Parish, lending generous support -- a mark of merit which can be
attributed to such Guilds in all parishes.

An active Sunday School is mentioned, which also contributed financially
as it `paid for the repairs to the lighting plant amounting to one pound
ten shillings,' as electricity from the grid was obviously not yet
connected to that fairly isolated area. (P40)

The 1927 Easter Meeting outlined the achievements of the parish. All who
had contributed to the life of the parish were thanked, especially those
who collected, organized functions, and taught at Sunday School. Special
mention was given to the Women's Guild who had provided new hangings and
kneelers.

The Services Register 1928 records the Easter 1 service at Murgon as
Holy Communion with 13 communicants. On Friday 20 April at 8.00 pm, `4
boys and 9 females' were confirmed by Archbishop Gerald
Sharp.\footnote{Diocese of Brisbane -- Murgon Services Register -- DJ 3,
  Box 2}

`Ernie's time at Murgon was coming to an end with a promotion in the
wind.' The parish of Christ Church, Childers, offered Rev Smith the
position of Rector, which was a promotion from his previous role of
Vicar and carried an appropriate increase in salary.

A letter from the Archbishop to the Childers parish, dated 11 April 1928
advised that Rev Smith had accepted the position and was resigning
Murgon as from 30 April. He had performed well in a situation that was
far from easy and had impressed the Church hierarchy.\footnote{Murgon
  Parish Correspondence -- ACSQ -- Archives.}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1928--1932 : Rev Eric D Eglinton}

Vicar Eglinton was appointed to the Parochial District of Murgon soon
after Rev Smith's departure, as an article in the 18 May 1928 Brisbane
\emph{Courier,} headed `Welcome' indicates:

`A large number of people gathered in the School of Arts to welcome the
Rev Eglinton, who has been appointed to take the place of Rev E H Smith,
Church of England minister, transferred to Childers. Rev Eglinton was
welcomed by Mr E H Standen and Rev T H Taylor (Methodist) after which a
short musical programme was gone through. Songs were tendered by Missies
E Duffie and R Bordiert, recitation by P Caswell and Hymn solos by Miss
F Scurr and Mr J Trudgion, Cornet solo by Mr Keating and selections by
the Murgon Orchestra. After the programme had been concluded dancing was
indulged in. Music was supplied by the Murgon Orchestra and extras by D
Anderson and Miss S Cole. The ladies provided supper.'\footnote{\emph{Brisbane
  Courier}, 18 May 1928.}

On arrival Vicar Eglinton was confronted with an Ecclesiastical Parish
constituted of the Lands Department Parishes of Cloyna, Nangur, Mount
McEwen, Cherbourg, Murgon, Charlestown, Johnstown, Barambah, Kadarga,
Gallangowan, Manumbar, Kilkivan, Widgee, Brooyar, Goomeribong, Proston,
Mondure, Boonara and Cushnie, From this extensive geographical area
twelve centres of worship were operating -- six major centres with the
capacity of the church buildings, were listed as being Murgon (100),
Boonara (80), Wondai (80), Goomeri (100), Kilkivan (100) and Mondure
(100) with another six outlying areas comprising Tingoora (60), plus,
with no actual church buildings - Abbeywood, Fat Hen Creek, Cinnabar,
Proston and Barambah Settlement.\footnote{\emph{Year Book --} 1919 --
  1927.}

Early in his ministry, other serious issues also had to be borne in
mind. In 1927/28 the Bundaberg area, only a couple of hours north of
Murgon, was hit by a devastating outbreak of Diphtheria. Many young
lives were lost as a consequence. This resulted in the swabbing of the
throats of 35 students at Murgon State Rural School following diagnosis
of cases in the town. In view of the way events had unfolded in
Bundaberg, it is easy to understand why such proactive measures were
taken locally. On a lighter note, the paper also reported on the
well-attended annual Church of England fundraising Ball, commenting that
it `considerably augmented' church funds. Novelty dances were won by
Miss Franks and Mr McLucas and Mr T Osbourne and partner. \footnote{\emph{Brisbane
  Courier,} 7 June 1928\emph{.}}

To facilitate smooth management and for parish council purposes, centre
wardens were appointed.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Murgon: S Trudgian and D L Jones
\item
  Boonara: J Stanton
\item
  Wondai: R Borton and C Robertson
\item
  Goomeri: C M Wimberley and H R Stanton
\item
  Kilkivan: C W Waldock and H Zahnleiter
\item
  Mondure: T Roseby
\item
  Tingoora: C Tesch and\ldots{} Northcott.\footnote{Diocesan Archives --
    Murgon Parish Minutes -- DJ 3, Box 3.}
\end{itemize}

This period from 1928 to 1932 was a difficult one for this enormous
parish and for its vicar. Demand for ministry increased incrementally as
the extensive grazing properties gave way to smaller agriculture and
dairy farming ventures and thus a rapid increase in population due to
closer settlement. The established routine of two Holy Communion
services and two Evensong gatherings continued. Congregations were
substantial as 23 Communicants at Mondure, on 3 June (Trinity Sunday),
30 Communicants at Kilkivan on 10 June, Trinity 1, and 39 Communicants
in Murgon on 17 June, Trinity 3, indicate. The vagaries of the weather
continued to interfere with smooth running and regular congregations as
seven consecutive low-attendance services in 1928 carried the side note
``Wet\emph{''.}\footnote{Diocesan Archives -- Murgon Parish Minutes --
  DJ 3, Box 3.}

From 1914 to 1928, ministers continued to be plagued by difficulties
with distances travelled and road conditions. Vehicles often became
bogged after even small falls of rain and it was not uncommon at these
times, and for other travel related reasons, for services to be
cancelled. Rev Eglinton is reported to have had the dubious privilege of
a Baby Austin as his mode of transport -- a very small car and a most
unsuitable vehicle prone to breakdowns and tyre trouble resulting from
the existing road conditions. He was often running late for services and
on one occasion the Kilkivan service register shows that he spent two
hours bogged in Wide Bay Creek before the ever-reliable old type of
\emph{horse}power was used to drag the vehicle out.\footnote{St Mathew's
  Kilkivan \emph{Centenary Booklet} p. 6; This is confirmed by an entry
  in \emph{Glimpses Through the Years --} a centenary booklet produced
  for Goomeri's centenary celebrations in 2016.}




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/austin7.jpg}
\caption{Austin 7 \emph{(slq.qld.gov.au)}}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


Several different ventures regarding clergy placement and parish
boundaries were put forward for consideration. It is interesting to note
that even with the aforementioned `tyranny of distance' between centres,
the large number of worship places had remained in place until this
time.\footnote{\emph{Glimpses Through the Years --} a centenary booklet
  produced for Goomeri's centenary.}

Changes were on the horizon, the first of such moves are recorded in the
minutes of the Kilkivan Parish Council meeting held 17 December 1928 as
follows:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Vicar -- Rev Eric D Eglinton
\item
  Proposed C Waldock, 2\textsuperscript{nd} Mr McKell `that Mr D L Jones
  be Peoples Warden'
\item
  Mr Galloway was elected Auditor on a motion proposed by C A Wimberley,
  Seconded by H P Stanton
\item
  Council members to be Ex-officio members plus Messers T Wise, McKell,
  A White. F Peters,
\end{itemize}

\begin{quote}
T D Kelley, T H Spencer, Stanley Maudsley, G Hughes, Wimberley,
Middleborough, J E Stanton
\end{quote}

The final item mentioned is one of great significance showing that as
early as 1928 moves were afoot to re-align parish boundaries.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Moved D L Jones, 2\textsuperscript{nd} J E Stanton `that Mr C M Lloyd,
  D Jones, T M Wise, C Wimberley, G Hughes and Mr Galloway be
  representatives to meet in the matter of distance of parishes.'
\end{itemize}

Just one year after Rev Eglinton's arrival in Murgon, the 25 June 1928
service register entry records a visit by `Bishop Gerald, Brisbane' who
officiated at the 7.30 pm Evensong in Goomeri. No doubt the current
position and possible ways forward were discussed with the locals.

Diocesan documentation dated 31 October 1928 advises that the Archdeacon
(Canon Garland) had submitted a report recommending that Murgon parish
be subdivided into two Parochial Districts consisting of:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  \underline{Murgon} -- comprising the following places -- Murgon,
  Wondai, Mondure, Tingoora, Proston, Abbeywood, Boat Mountain, Barambah
  Settlement, Hivesville and Cloyna.
\item
  \underline{Kilkivan} -- comprising the following places -- Kilkivan,
  Goomeri, Boonara, Manumbar, Woolooga, Fat Hen Creek, Sexton and
  Cinnabar.
\end{itemize}

On the motion of Canon Garland, it was recommended that these two new
Districts be formed. The document is signed: `Gerald, Brisbane' - and
dated 2 August 1928.\footnote{Diocesan Archives -- Murgon Parish
  correspondence -ACSQ - signed +\emph{Gerald, Brisbane} and dated 31
  October 1928.}

Rapidly increasing density of population in the Murgon district was
undoubtedly the driving force behind the constitution of the two
districts which operated separately and were known locally as Parish of
Kilkivan and Parish of Murgon respectively.\footnote{JE Murphy and EW
  Easton, \emph{Wilderness to Wealth: being a history of the shires of
  Nanango, Kingaroy, Wondai, Murgon, Kilkivan and the Upper Yarraman
  portion of the Rosalie Shire, 1850-1950}, Brisbane, WR Smith \&
  Patterson, 1950, repr. 1974, p. 314.} While the problems with travel
between the wide-spread centres within the parish continued, it seems
also that financial constraints endured in the difficult years following
World War 1 were still evident in this period and splitting the area
into two zones could go a long way to alleviating this financial strain.

Rev Eglinton relocated to Goomeri with oversight of the Kilkivan
district until 1932 thereby beginning a long association with Kilkivan,
Goomeri and Boonara churches and the outlying regions of Fat Hen Creek.
Sexton, Cinnabar and Woolooga. However, as mentioned in Chapter 3,
services in some of these ceased soon after this though determined and
enthusiastic moves for the construction of places of worship in Woolooga
were made but sadly were discontinued after three years, financial
issues having intervened. Rev Eglinton is credited with having initiated
(though unsuccessful) moves towards having Woolooga and Sexton
transferred to Gympie region. St Matthew's, Kilkivan, (established in
1888) had been serviced under the Tiaro umbrella until 1920.

Rev Eglington and his wife were an active team in ministry and all
church affairs. Mrs Eglington worked tirelessly in running Ladies Guilds
in Goomeri, Kilkivan and Boonara. Minutes attest to her serving as
founding President at Boonara and Goomeri. As usual, these guilds were
stalwarts in raising funds through time honoured activities such as
catering, hosting social functions, fetes, garden parties and street
stalls as well as helping organise concerts and balls.\footnote{\emph{Diocesan
  Archives -} Murgon Parish Minutes -- \emph{Holy Trinity,}
  Windera\emph{,} Guild Minutes p. 1 - DJ 3, Box 3.}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1929--1933 : Rev Howard Saull}

With Rev Eglinton separately installed in Goomeri, Rev Saull began as
Vicar of the Murgon portion of the newly-divided former parochial
district. Although his induction service was conducted by Rev William
Powning Glover (Archdeacon, Toowoomba, 1927-1945) on 4 February, his
ministry began the morning after his arrival in the parish. Vicar Saull
conducted his first service in Murgon at 7.30am on Wednesday, 2 January
1929 -- attendance 3. However, the congregation increased to 15
communicants the following Sunday at the 7.30am service, followed by the
11.00am Eucharist at St Mary's, Wondai -- communicants 3. His day
continued with two more Evensong services -- 2.30pm at St George's,
Tingoora and 7.30pm in Murgon. This busy routine continued throughout
January though varied as regards venues to accommodate the many outlying
centres -- usually with a service of Evensong, although the 13 January
register mentions Holy Communion at St Faith's, Mondure with a
congregation of 15.

The month of February appears to have been a difficult one for the new
vicar as several notes in the service register indicate -- for example,
`No Service -- Raining'; `Heavy storm'; `Roads impassable'\emph{.} Such
comments provide us with a clear picture of the `tyrannies' not only of
distance but also of weather and the impact such natural events made on
the rough and unsealed roads to be travelled. A Mr H Legatt was
installed as a Lay Reader for Christ Church Murgon on 1 July 1929, an
appointment no doubt gladly welcomed by Rev Saull.\footnote{Diocesan
  Archives -- Murgon Parish Services Register 1927 -- 1937 -- DJ 3, Box2}

Although the constant need to raise funds continued during these
between-the-wars years, there were many happy times associated with
church activities. As usual, the Guild ladies were at the fore with
great assistance given by their menfolk, congregation members and local
businesses.

On 23 December,1929 the \emph{Courier Mail} lists such an event:

Murgon: \emph{Christmas Tree \textbf{-- }}A Christmas Tree under the
auspices of the local Church of England, was held in the School of Arts
on Friday night last, there being a good attendance. The children
received gifts from the tree, and dancing was indulged in by the older
folk. The music for the evening was supplied by Miss Perrett's
orchestra. \footnote{\emph{Courier Mail,} Brisbane, 29 December 1929}

A \emph{Courier Mail} article dated 3 November 1930 another such event,
providing enjoyable social engagement for young and not so young, alike.
`A fancy-dress children's ball\emph{\textbf{,}} organised by the ladies
of the Church of England, was held in the Star Theatre, Murgon last
week. Mr J Tiernan was in charge of the programme, whilst Mr C Hansen
supervised the grand march. Novelty dances were won by Misses I
Houghton, V Dow and B Tiernan, and competitions by Mr S Fenner and
Misses Hold and Beitzel. A Maypole dance and folk dancing items were
given by a number of children'. A 1931, 14 September edition of the same
newspaper notes the 4 September official opening of Murgon's new Rifle
Range by the club president and chairman of the Murgon Shire Council, Mr
A Leich which had been assisted with finance by a grant from the Defence
Department\emph{.}\footnote{\emph{Courier Mail,} Brisbane, 30 November
  1930 and 14 September 1931, p 8}

Two articles with reference to the church at Hivesville appeared in the
\emph{Church Chronicle} during 1932. The first in the 1 July edition
featured an article on the official opening of the Church of the Holy
Spirit by Rev H Saull on 15 May 1932 and included a photo of the church
and congregation. A small article followed which is printed in full in
the separate section on the church later in this book. The second
appeared in the 1 November edition's article from Murgon Parish. This
also appears in the Hivesville Church section.\footnote{\emph{The Church
  Chronicle,}1 July 1932, p. 217; and 1 November 1932, p 363}

September 1932 services register reveal a very full two-day visit by
from Bishop Horace Henry Dixon. The entry for 11.00am on Saturday, 10
September stated `Consecration of Mondure Cemetery'\emph{.} This had
been a long-established burial place dating from early settlement times,
St Faith's Church having later been built adjacent. Later at 3.00pm
Bishop Dixon officiated at a service of Confirmation in Murgon for 10
girls and 9 boys.

Sunday 11 September saw the Bishop officiating and preaching at 7.30am
Holy Communion in Murgon followed by a drive to Wondai for 10.00am Holy
Communion service. His busy day continued with travel to Hivesville
where, at 1.30pm, the Church of the Holy Spirit was blessed and
dedicated along with the confirmation of seven boys and eight girls.
This was followed by the private Confirmation of two girls at Cushnie
and by 1.30pm he was back to conduct Evensong in Murgon.\footnote{Diocesan
  Archives -- Murgon Parish Services Register, 1927 -- 1937 -- DJ 3, Box
  2}

The last entry in Rev Saull's handwriting for 26 February 1933 stated
blandly -- ``\emph{No Service Vicar ill''.} It appears a period of
illness follows as the next entry was simply dated March and was listed
as 7.30pm, Evensong, Murgon and signed DGL. Church records confirm that
David George Tweedy and H Leggat were both registered Lay Readers in the
parish who contributed by conducting services as required on an
irregular basis. There are no entries after this date for Rev Saull in
the Murgon Services Register or the Kilkivan Services Register.

After the initial optimism leading to two separation into two zones,
financial constraints appear to have been the main contributing factor
leading to the collapse of the `two districts' scheme and also to Rev
Saull's decline in health. Rev Saull relocated to St Luke's, Rosewood,
some three months later, commencing duties as acting Rector on 1
June,1933. His first service in that parish is noted as being 4 June
1934.

During this 1928-1933 period, while ministry matters remained relatively
stable, there were many undercurrents of discontent regarding parish
boundaries and a great deal of parochialism evident between the centres.

\emph{Glimpses Through the Years} indicates the indefatigable Archdeacon
Glover seems to have worked tirelessly to provide a solution acceptable
to all parties -- a very difficult task indeed! However, despite the
best efforts of the two vicars, parish councillors and guilds, the
venture `proved to be financially unviable.'\footnote{\emph{Glimpses
  Through the Years --} Goomeri Centenary Booklet, p. 5} Building on the
1928 proposals put forward by Canon Garland and signed into effect by
Archbishop Sharp in August of that year, (as mentioned above) re
division of areas, Glover chaired a meeting in Goomeri on 16 September
1930 where his account of meeting with representatives in Murgon
indicated they were `not in favour of amalgamating with Kilkivan
Parish.'

Through the 1930/1933 period Archdeacon Glover worked tirelessly,
conducting many meetings and consultations with all parties in an effort
to provide a solution in a resistant atmosphere. It appears that `the
ever-patient Archdeacon Glover' had to contend, not only with a
resistant attitude from the Murgon end, but also similar negativity for
Kilkivan who stood \emph{`}firm in its resistance to becoming a part of'
a Murgon Parish.

Finally, to all appearances, pressure to bring the matter to a head
brought results. A lecture headed `Glimpses of the Past. A lecture on
the early history of the Anglican Church in the Wide Bay and Burnett
Archdeaconry given at the Pialba Clergy Conference in April 1971 by the
Venerable H J Richards, BA, Th L. stated that: On 18 February 1933
Archdeacon Glover chaired a meeting in Goomeri where Mr David L Jones
moved (seconded by Mr Wimberley) ``that it be an \textbf{instruction} to
the parish representatives at the meeting with the (Diocesan) Committee
in Brisbane \textbf{to agree to} the Parish of Kilkivan taking over part
of the Parish of Murgon Viz. the township of Murgon plus Windera and
also Booubyjan, from the Parish of Gayndah; the parish to take over half
the debt of \pounds300 owing by the Parish of Nanango but accept no liability
in regard to the debt of \pounds400 in the Murgon church.
Carried.''\,'\footnote{\emph{Glimpses of the Past.} A lecture on the
  early history of the Anglican Church in the wide Bay and Burnett
  Archdeaconry given at the Pialba Clergy Conference in April 1971 by
  the Venerable HJ Richards, BA, Th L.}

Thus, the Parochial District of Kilkivan was re constituted (to include
Murgon) with Wondai as a separate district. The only deviation from this
proposal appears to have been that objections were raised by the
interested parties regarding Booubyjan/Gayndah and it was agreed that
the current arrangements would remain.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1932--1942 : Rev James Lee-Warner}

Rev James Lee-Warner (1889 -- 1975) followed Rev Eric Eglington as Vicar
of the newly proclaimed Parochial district of Kilkivan on 22 May 1932
and continued to reside in Goomeri. Although, `officially proclaimed' as
a total parish entity, it continued to function as two districts until
1933.

The new vicar had a very varied ministry story prior to his appointment
to this parish. He began his clerical career in 1913 with three years as
curate at Rythope, Durham, England, before serving as a soldier (though
a deacon) 1915-1919 then returning to ordained ministry. His ministry
took him all over the world, in many roles, including being custodian,
Department of Antiquities, Palestine. He eventually arrived in Australia
in 1926, where he served in Warwick, South Brisbane, Dalby and
Chinchilla, then as a missionary chaplain to the Brisbane Diocese before
finally taking up his appointment as `Vicar - Parish of Kilkivan' which,
at that time, covered Windera and Boonara as well as Kilkivan and
Goomeri and the smaller satellite centres. There was some overlapping in
bringing the new Parish of Kilkivan into full function as Rev Saull
continued to serve as Vicar of the Murgon until June 1933.

Parochial bias and hard-line attitudes confronted Rev Lee-Warner from
the time of his arrival. According to the Kilkivan church's services
register, his first service there was on 22 May 1932. The Kilkivan
Centenary booklet states: `Kilkivan parishioners always seem to have
favoured Low Church practice, and in fact, Rev Lee Warner was warned by
the Parish Wardens on his arrival to `dispense with the High Church
doctrines of the Parish.'\footnote{St Matthew's Kilkivan Centenary
  Booklet p. 9}

From the Kilkivan services register -- 22 May 1932: `The Rev James
Lee-Warner Th. A. was this day licenced as Vicar of the Church and
Parochial district of St Matthew's, Kilkivan and appointed to reside
within the said district.'\footnote{Diocese of Brisbane, Murgon Services
  Register -- DJ 3, Box 2} Murgon welcomed him with a pleasant gathering
in the Oddfellows Hall.

An article from a 1933 \emph{The Church Chronicle} contains the Service
List from March 5 to April 2 and indicates a busy schedule of four or
five services every Sunday and good coverage of the large and
well-spread Murgon Parish and further records:

\begin{quote}
\emph{`The Christmas efforts were not so successful as two years ago,
only \pounds30 being made from the whole parish, but there is a fair amount of
toys left in hand. Rain spoilt the Windera Christmas Tree, and Wondai
decided not to have one. Hivesville was the most successful, being
followed by Murgon, Proston and Tingoora. Christmas Day was easily a
record, the number of communicants in Murgon being a record for any
service held in the parish since the present book started in 1919, the
date of separation from Nanango. This equally applies to the other
services held on Christmas Day. Lent starts on Wednesday, 1 March. There
will be a special service and address in Murgon every Wednesday night.
May I remind you that the 40 days of Lent are ``days of fasting, or
abstinence''.'}\footnote{\emph{The Church Chronicle}- March 1, 1933,
  p.93.}
\end{quote}

Rev Lee-Warner's first entry for a service in Murgon was for Wednesday 9
March 1933 and is listed as Lent Service and Address\emph{,} followed by
a 7.00am HC Thursday 10 March.

The rest of March followed an intriguing pattern of Sunday Evensongs
conducted by \emph{DGT --} Lay Reader, David George Tweedy who was
licenced as a lay reader for Christ Church Murgon until 2 September
1941. Regular, Lee-Warner-led week-day services of Morning Prayer and
address on Wednesdays and Holy Communion at times varying over 6.30am,
7.00am, 7.30am on Thursday or Friday, continued for the remainder of
March. There is no mention of any visits to outlying centres in the
Murgon district. This would seem to confirm the general assumption that
Rev Saull was ill at the time, possibly on leave, so only such entries
were in the Murgon Services Register while Rev Eglinton would have
maintained the former Parish Register for his area in Goomeri. Sadly,
this register has been lost to posterity. There is a similar gap from
September 1932 until 1944 in the Boonara Services Register. However,
anecdotal evidence indicates Rev Lee-Warner's diligence in providing
services and a willingness to co-operate with both sections of the
parish, still divided, at least by attitude, though officially `one'.
Rev Lee-Warner and Mr Tweedy conducted Murgon service until 27 August,
after which Lee-Warner undertook all services.

Rev E H Smith returned to officiate at three services in March 1935.
Other priests who undertook services on a periodic basis up to 1937
include H V Golding and J E Devine. Side notes carefully entered in the
register of services provides an historical record of the era.
Lee-Warner's entry in the Memoranda column marked the passing of King
George V with service on Tuesday 28 January 1936 at 6.30am - a Requiem
and Eucharist attended by fifteen persons. During the month of February,
Sunday services plus one on Ash Wednesday service were confined to
Murgon. However, the 1 March Lent 1 service was at Boonara at 11.00am.
Further side notes include -- Collection 1/3d ABM; Refreshment Sunday;
and one marked `Temperance'.\footnote{Diocese of Brisbane, Murgon
  Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2}

Though named Parish of Kilkivan as a recognition of Kilkivan's
historical significance in the early settlement era, the administration
centre and residence were both located in Murgon, in an attempt to
satisfy and acknowledge the two main centres. Rev Lee Warner expressed
his opinion that the rectory needed to be in Murgon rather than Goomeri
`because of Cherbourg'.

The Pimlott's cottage in Taylor Street became available for purchase. It
was generously offered to the parish by Mr and Mrs Pimlott at a cost of
\pounds200 on a deposit of \pounds50 to be paid off, interest free, over 10 years. A
reference was made to the possibility of monies `from the Shepherd
Bequest' being utilized in making the dwelling `ready for the rector to
move into'. However Diocesan advice was that this was not possible. The
attitude of parochial non-cooperation again appeared with Kilkivan
representatives stating that they were `of the opinion that Murgon was
not yet part of the parish' but adding that they would `have no
objections to renting the house if the Murgon bought it'
themselves.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence files, October 1935,
  Diocesan Records and Archives Centre, Brisbane}

Archdeacon Glover again intervened. His considered opinion was that the
house, `centrally located and conveniently placed as regards the
church', was cheap the offered price (as it had been valued at \pounds350).
However, in his 29 November 1935 letter\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence
  file, 29 November 1935, Diocesan Records and Archives Centre, Brisbane},
he voiced the opinion that there were several issues to be taken into
account:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Responsibility for raising the \pounds200 rests entirely with Murgon which
  already owes \pounds400 on its current account and has committed to \pounds50/pa
  to the parish's working account.
\item
  With no money on hand the full purchase price would need to be
  borrowed and it should have money on hand before incurring more debt.
\item
  Murgon and Kilkivan regard themselves as separate entities whereas
  Murgon is definitely now part of Kilkivan Parish -- this point to be
  made clear to both.
\item
  As to the future, no undertaking could be given at the present time as
  to whether Murgon should remain in Kilkivan Parish or whether it
  should become part of Wondai.
\end{itemize}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.5\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.48\textwidth,right]{images/reportMurgonHouse.png}
\caption{Report Murgon House}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Letters to Bishop Dixon and the Diocesan Property and Finance Board,
signed by G Waldock and P Sing, indicated that the Murgon centre had
pressed ahead and the house had been purchased, the rector was now
installed, and that rental by the parish was set at 15 shillings per
week. The necessary paperwork re transferring of deeds etc was being
completed.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence files, November 1935 to
  February 1936, Diocesan Records and Archives Centre, Brisbane}

A 1936 \emph{South Burnett Times} article documents a change of
residency from Goomeri to Murgon. It states: `The location of the
Minister in charge of the Murgon Parish of the Church of England has
again reverted to Murgon, and Rev Lee-Warner, after several years'
residence in Goomeri, last week moved to Murgon where he will in future
reside. No Church of England minister has been stationed in Murgon since
the departure of Rev H Saull some years ago.'\footnote{The \emph{South
  Burnett Times,} 21 February 1936. Newspaper cutting contributed by
  Jeff and Muriel Schultz.}

While it appears that the Murgon centre was desirous of upgrading the
interior furniture as on 24 September 1936, the Diocesan Records and
Archives Centre recorded: `A faculty was this day issued authorising the
erection in the Church of Christ Church Murgon of an altar of Silky Oak
with Cross in centre and Credence Table -- no objection having been
raised' other evidence indicates that these items were there when the
church was dedicated in April 1920 and the oversight was simply being
rectified some 16 years later.\footnote{Diocesan Records and Archives
  Centre, Brisbane.}

Rev Lee-Warner contributed to the Jubilee Booklet of St Matthew's
church, Kilkivan in 1938, mentioning a reference to Kilkivan area in
Bush Notes when the Bush Brothers operated out of Gayndah. The booklet
(p. 15) also states that Lee-Warner `wrote a very good history of the
church at that time -- priced at One Shilling -- \ldots affectionally
known as The Little Red Book'. It remains a valued historical record of
the period immediately preceding the 1939 outbreak of the second world
war which was to have a significant impact on the local church. Rev
Steer returned to the area for that special day at Kilkivan, preaching
at an 11.00am service and at evensong. Between services, the worshippers
partook of a Basket Picnic in the Kilkivan church grounds.

World War Two had a significant impact on the district. There were
several known rifle ranges in the parish and stories of the presence of
soldiers crossing fields where dairy cattle were grazing are common in
the area. The presence of these soldiers resulted in surge of social
activities and church involvement. Rifle Clubs were first formed in the
area in the very early 1900s, but an understandable resurgence occurred
during this period -- often with mixed-gender membership.

An entry in the cash book of the Murgon Church of England Ladies Guild,
13 August 1940 records a donation of \pounds1 to Soldiers and Sailors Help
Society and 24 October 1940, the purchase of an Airman Doll plus postage
-- possibly for use as a raffle prize. However, it must have proved to
be unsuitable for purposes as the next page shows a cash refund for
`Airman Doll'.\footnote{Murgon Church of England Ladies Guild Cash Book
  1940-1966} It was around this time that the names of May and Bill
Gedge began to appear regularly in church documentation.

A newspaper clipping dated 17 October 1943 speaks of an entertainment
and fundraising venture `with a difference' in Murgon. `A bridge party,
in aid of the funds of the local Church of England, was held at the
residence of Mr and Mrs F R Skyring. The bridge prizes were won by Mr V
G Tickle and Mrs N Kidd. Competitions were won by Mrs Tickle and Mrs
Roberts.' This article contains names significant in Murgon church's
history. Tickle was a pharmacist, Skyring is mentioned in early minutes
and Roberts family still have descendants operating a solicitors' office
and taxation service in Murgon.~ Bill Roberts (recently deceased and son
of GW Roberts the first solicitor and taxation agent in Murgon) was
Shire Council Chairman for many years and a valued contributor to the
Anglican church.~ His wife Mary (nee Cobb) was the daughter of early
settler settlers.~ Cobbs Hill, near Cloyna, is named after
them.\footnote{Newspaper clipping -- Courtesy Jeff and Muriel Schultz,
  Murgon.}

Several points indicate that Rev Lee Warner carried an affection for
Goomeri - his initial place of residence in the parish. He is credited
locally with having brought Olive and Pomegranate seeds from the Holy
Land which he successfully managed to cultivate. The resulting Olive
tree still grows happily at the rear of the Church of the Epiphany while
the Pomegranate bush stood until around the year 2000 when termite
infestation of its root system, posing a danger to the church building,
necessitated its removal.\footnote{\emph{Glimpses Through the Years --}
  Goomeri Centenary Booklet, p. 18.}

Mrs Sylvia Jennings visited the parish in October 1995. As Rev Lee
Warner's daughter, she had decided to make a `nostalgia tour' of the
parish which held both fond and sad memories for her. She was pleased to
see the two trees still growing, the Pomegranate carrying fruit at the
time. Her mother Elizabeth's death had been commemorated by a framed
print under glass -- \emph{In the Glory of God --} organized in honour
of her efforts as a Sunday School teacher there, the plaque reading `In
Memory of Elizabeth Lee Warner. Died 04-09-1956. Given by the Pupils and
Staff of the Church of the Epiphany Sunday School, 21-07-1957.` A letter
to the Goomeri Guild in August 1995 requested a service to dedicate a
donated Ciborium for Goomeri Church donated by Mrs Jennings was the
prompt for her whole of parish visit. Gifted in memory of her father and
honouring his time there as vicar and purchased from Pelligrine
(Brisbane) for \$245 with an extra \$80 for engraving and re-silvering
over the engraving, the beautiful Ciborium was officially dedicated as
requested in a `whole of parish' service by the rector, Fr Bavin Clarke,
on 22 October 1995, appropriately, in the presence of his daughter
Sylvia.\footnote{Goomeri Guild Notes -- Held by secretary in Goomeri.}

Rev Lee-Warner ministered to the parish as Vicar until 10 September
1940, leaving to take up his position as rector of the parish of
Beaudesert on 14 September 1940. Lee-Warner's last service as recorded
in the Murgon Services Register was held 8 September 1940.\footnote{St
  Matthew's Kilkivan, Centenary Booklet, P.5 and p.1} At the time of his
leaving,

The Year Book records synodsmen as E D G Stanley and R Reugg, with
Messrs Jeffries and Stanton as wardens.

Records indicate that wanderlust subsequently took him to North Africa
(1963 -1965) where he served in H M Embassy. His final posting in his
priestly career (1965 -- 1667) was as Chaplain at All Saints Marseilles
-- Gibraltar. He passed away in 1975. He and his wife, Margaret
Elizabeth (Hewlett) were held in high regard by all the congregations he
served.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records, Diocesan Archives Centre,
  Brisbane}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1940--1944 : Rev Harold Wilmot
Griffiths}

Rev HW Griffiths (1892 -- 1951) was ordained in 1927 prior to arriving
in Australia where, on 21 December 1934 he took up a position as
priest-in-charge at Miriam Vale, diocese of Rockhampton, later moving to
Blackall where he served as rector till 8 November 1940

By 1940 the second World War was raging and having a great effect on the
Australian population. Rev Griffiths' three and a half year stay in the
parish commenced on 24 November. 26 parishioners attended the Sunday
before Advent 7.30pm Holy Communion service in Murgon, no doubt with the
war to the forefront of their prayers as many local young men and women
were already involved in the forces. Christmas Day, Wednesday 25
December, hosted one only service of Holy Communion with 31 attendees
with offerings totalling \pounds1-5-6.\footnote{Diocese of Brisbane --
  Kilkivan Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2} The 1940 Year Books names
Kilkivan, Boonara, Goomeri, Murgon, Fat Hen Creek and Manumbar as places
of worship, S Fenwick as synodsman with R B Jeffries and J S Stanton as
wardens.




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.6\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.58\textwidth,right]{images/kilkivanServiceRegister.png}
\caption{Kilkivan Service Register 1937-51}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


During the early stages of World War 11, The United States of America
was officially neutral and thus precluded from participating in the
conflicts in both Europe and Asia. US maintained an armed presence in
the Pacific and was officially engaging in diplomatic negotiations with
Japan for possible peace in Asia. However, the unannounced bombing of
the USA base in Pearl Harbour on 7 December 1941 led to their
declaration of war against Japan on 11 December 1941 and to Germany's
subsequent declaration of war against the USA. These events impacted
heavily on the local citizens, many of whom were of British, Irish, or
other European ethnic origins.\footnote{Wikipedia}

With the advance of the Japanese army resembling an avalanche
approaching our shores, a fall-back defence deployment known as the
Brisbane Line was formed. Murgon was the designated headquarters of the
3\textsuperscript{rd} Armoured Division of 16,000 troops. Troops from
many and varied Divisions and Squadrons were stationed throughout the
whole Murgon area from Yarraman and Kingaroy to Manumbar, Gympie and
Windera and all areas in between. \emph{Murgon in Focus} carries an
account from `the official war diary (24 April 1943) (secret until
1973)' indicating the `location of the 3\textsuperscript{rd} Armoured
Division \ldots{} positioning \ldots{} began on Christmas Day
1942'\footnote{Murgon In Focus (page 211)}

In Murgon 26 people were present for a 7.30am Holy Communion service
with Evensong at 7.30pm the following Sunday, 1 December -- Advent 1,
while on Advent 2, a single 7.30pm Evensong service was celebrated. A
special Children's service and a Memorial Thanksgiving service were
subsequently celebrated with offerings of \pounds3-3-4, an amazing amount for
the time and circumstances.\footnote{Diocese of Brisbane, Murgon
  Services Register -- DJ 3, Box 2}

All levels of society and all ages need the Lord more urgently in such
times and these services would have helped bring the Peace of God to the
hearts of parishioners. People still, today, speak of the privations
endured during these war time years and the ones which followed with
severe rationing of necessary and basic items such as fuel. This in no
small way hindered the provision of regular church services in this
large parish. Along with the shortage of manpower to run farms and
industries, congregations were also faced with added difficulties of
supply shortages regarding their means of church attendance.

People on the land fared better, on the whole, than those in the urban
areas with regard to food supplies, particularly the dairy farmers.
Vegetable gardens were a high priority in all areas and chickens were a
common site even in smaller town allotments with some town dwellers even
having the luxury of a house cow. Farmers had the added advantage of a
more accessible meat supply with their cattle and piggeries though the
slaughtering of same was an added chore. Bartering was common. The
advent of railways to outlying areas proved a life-saving bonus to many.
Generous residents, town and country, were very open-handed in helping
others in need, and indeed, by showing appreciation for the efforts of
their clergy. Many stories are told of `swaggies' traipsing the land in
search of odd jobs often for payment in the form of a meal and of
families reduced to living in tents on creek banks, living a hand to
mouth existence with fish, rabbits etc and whatever else could be
gleaned `off the land' augmented occasionally with hand-outs from the
locals and the church. Times were very tough for many people.

The first service register entry for 1941 was Evensong on
5\textsuperscript{th} January. Ministry-wise, Murgon continued to be
well provided for over the following period, with the outlying areas of
Goomeri and Kilkivan covered adequately, considering the circumstances.
Boonara and Windera seem to have been on a one-per-month visit from Rev
Griffiths and Cherbourg church received attention mostly from Lay
Reader, Mr W Atkins.

One service with a difference was held 2 March -- Lent 1 -- where the
name of AC Flint, Organising

Secretary for ABM is listed as officiating. During 1941, various efforts
were made to combine some much-needed social engagement with extra
church funding. Several entries such as Social Afternoon, Fete Takings,
Produce Stall, Raffle, Concert and Garden Party, to name but a few, in
the Murgon Guild Cash book attest to this. Mrs Griffiths was very
actively involved in these parish

activities, with her name appearing several times in regard to the
receipt of funds raised by her.\footnote{Murgon Guild Cash Book -- March
  1940 -- March 1966}

In 1942, with activities still greatly curtailed by petrol rationing,
shortage of supplies and finance, Rev Griffiths `appealed for more
direct giving as it was `extremely difficult to raise money with
concerts etc in the sad days of war.' He also asked people in all
centres to bring evacuees to Church and to be more hospitable to the
troops stationed in the camps their area. On another occasion he
suggested that the Church of England dairymen should seek advice from
the Roman Catholic dairymen on how to get to Church on time for early
church services as only the 11.00am or later services were well
attended.' \footnote{St Matthew's Kilkivan Centenary Booklet p. 11}

The Annual General Meeting held 17 May 1944 recorded an attendance of
twelve, being regular representatives from each centre, along with six
apologies.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The vicar's report covered the past year's parish events and included
  thanks to all who had contributed and assisted him throughout.
\item
  The meeting oversaw the appointment of a familiar list of office
  bearers for the following year (which included the appointment of Mr R
  Pearson as a parish council representative in place of his late
  father).
\item
  The secretary was asked to write to the Diocese regarding the
  non-receipt of grant monies to assist in servicing Cherbourg
  Settlement which was provided with church services by the vicar and
  lay readers. A Sunday School operated weekly at a cost to the parish.
  Recompense was sought.
\item
  While the financial position was considered `not bad' it was felt `a
  special effort to be made by each centre to fulfil their quotas to
  keep the parish at a desirable level. Small finance committees at each
  centre was recommended to attain this end.' Quotas, with the exception
  of Fat Hen Creek, were unchanged.
\item
  Murgon, Goomeri, Boonara and Kilkivan were asked to each contribute \pounds5
  towards the liquidation of the Car Fund of \pounds20.
\item
  A letter of sympathy was to be sent to Mr Wimberley `expressing the
  council's deep concern over his illness and wishing him a speedy
  recovery.'
\item
  An invitation was issued by Murgon centre to other areas to attend
  Church of England Men's Society (CEMS) meetings held on the second
  Thursday of each month.
\end{itemize}

The meeting concluded in the usual way with welcome refreshments again
provided by the willing band of Goomeri guild ladies who were thanked
wholeheartedly.

In his article in the 1 January 1943 \emph{Church Chronicle}, Rev
Griffiths wrote of the trials envisaged for the year ahead but assured
readers that by `keeping touch with the Eternal Source of Strength' they
with would be able to `face the unknown without fear'. \footnote{Church
  Chronicle -- 1 January 1943}

By 1943 the several camps for training soldiers in the area provided
Padres assisting Rev Griffiths in ministry by actively participating in
the provision of church services in the district and with soldiers under
their care also attending. Two names mentioned are Padre Burnett and
Padre McCulloch. For example, on 15 January six services were held in
the parish. Padre Stewart Burnett officiated at 7.30am Holy Communion
and again at 7.30pm Evensong, both in Murgon. Also, at 7.30pm, Lay
Reader Mr W Atkins (commonly referred to as Bill or Willie) held an
Evensong service at Cherbourg Settlement (CAS). In between these hours,
Rev Griffiths was busy further afield with 11.00am Holy Communion,
Goomeri; Windera - 3.00pm Evensong; then back for a second service in
Goomeri at 7.30pm also Evensong. With this arrangement, Murgon and
Cherbourg were well covered, so a similar basic pattern of services
continued almost unchanged through January and beyond, though weekly
variations were made to Rev Griffiths' schedule to cater for all
outlying church centres.

Several army camps in the Murgon, Goomeri and Kilkivan areas are
recalled with locations also indicated on maps of the time. Notations in
the Memoranda column made specific reference to the soldiers and the
camps, some with arrows pointing to identify church services and the
enhanced attendance figures.

One service in particular stands out: Sunday 25 April 1943, Easter Day,
recorded an attendance of 110 in Murgon, Goomeri 36, and Kilkivan 37, at
their respective morning Holy Communion services. This was followed on
Monday 26 April with the towns of Murgon 9.00am, and Goomeri 11.00am,
commemorating Anzac Day with parades and Memorial Services conducted by
Rev Griffiths.

The \emph{Church Chronicle} of 1 January carried information from
Kilkivan parish. After wishing all a happy new year, Rev Griffiths
commented on the fact that for the past year the district had hosted
thousands of service persons. He expressed his deep thankfulness for
`the hospitality given them, and also the maintenance of decent living.'
His article concluded with notice of suspended services of 9, 16 and 23
January with resumption on 30 January. During his leave, if needed, his
services could be accessed via the wardens. Mr Downing consented to
assist if necessary.\footnote{Church Chronicle -- 1 January 1944 p.26}

With the trials and tribulations which war had imposed on the parish
above the usual ones of administration, travel and finance, the parish
had come through in a relatively favourable state. The possibility of
replacing the ageing and well-worn vehicle was under consideration.
Diocesan correspondence supports the positive state of the parish with a
letter from Rev Griffiths requesting consideration be given to raising
the status from `Parochial District of Kilkivan' to `Parish' to provide
impetus for further growth, suggesting further that acceptance of the
proposal `\emph{by Easter'} would be very welcome. Minimum stipend at
the time was \pounds310. This had been in place for the past three years and
Rev Griffiths was happy for this to continue along with a
parish-provided car allowance of \pounds100. A copy of a letter to Gayndah
Parish, signed by R B Jeffries and J E Stanton (Wardens), requested that
the Booubyjan centre be transferred to Kilkivan control as it was in `a
better position to give regular services.'

One happy occasion arising from the presence of troops in the area was
the marriage of local lass, Barbara Mary Wrigley, daughter of Walter and
Mabel Wrigley, to Donald Bert Hanson, AIF, (Zeehan, Tasmania) on 12
February 1944, celebrated in Christ Church Murgon by Rev Griffiths with
Miss Dobe at the organ. The bride was attended by Matron of Honour, Mrs
A Aubrey, and bridesmaids, Missies Bonnie Burton and Peggy Fuller. Mr
Vic Jordan (Longford, Tasmania) was best man and Mr W Crawford
(Brisbane) was groomsman. An extensive account of the wedding was
published in the local newspaper, giving detailed descriptions of
frocking (including style and colour) of the bridal party including
mother of the bride, as well as of the bouquets and floral arrangements
in the church and at the reception.\footnote{South Burnett Times article
  -- newspaper clipping and photo -- Donna Hindley (nee Hanson)}

The Parish Annual General Meeting was held in the Goomeri CWA rooms 30
April 1944 with Rev

Griffiths in the chair and the familiar names of Sing, Waldock, Atkins,
Sempf, Zahnleiter, Jeffries, Stumm, R and DL Jones, J and H P Stanton,
Tate, Beitzel and Wimberley attending. Bardrick and Pearson were
apologies. After dealing with the matters of minutes, correspondence,
reports and quotas, officer-bearers are listed as: J E Stanton --
Rectors Warden; R Jeffries -- Peoples Warden; H C Kemp -- Secretary /
Treasurer; Synod representatives -- Messrs Stanley and Rewig.

A visit by the Archbishop in May was announced with confirmation
services 15 May in Wondai; 16 May -- Murgon and Goomeri; 17 May --
Kilkivan. Arrangements were made for his welcome at the various centres
with Messrs Waldock and Atkins to meet the Archbishop on his arrival in
the parish.

Vicar Griffiths addressed the meeting, thanking members for such a good
attendance and for all the assistance, fellowship and personal support
afforded him by the wardens, parish council members, ladies guilds and
the thriving Sunday Schools, particularly in Murgon, Goomeri and
Kilkivan. He then announced that this would be his last meeting with
them, having accepted the Archbishop's invitation to move to the Parish
of Palmwoods. Six members expressed the sincere regret of all the
parishioners, stating that they `would miss him and the good work he was
doing among the people.' They `wished him good health and every success
and happiness in his new parish.'

Rev Griffiths' time in the Parish of Kilkivan drew to a close on 17
May1944. He moved to the parochial district of Palmwoods where he served
till February 1947. Later positions included Beaudesert and Lutwyche.
His years of ministry concluded with him holding a general licence in
Brisbane until his death in 1974.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records,
  Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1944--1946 : Rev Alfred Stephen
Jull}

In 1944 the parish had applied through its vicar Rev Griffiths to be
granted benefice parish status. Diocesan Council received the request on
12 April 1944\footnote{Diocesan Council Minutes, 12 April 1944} and on 4
May adopted the `recommendation to raise the status to benefice with a
rector.\footnote{Diocesan Council Minutes, 12 April 1944} Consequently,
Rev Jull (1914-1982), after arriving in the parish on 1 July 1944, was
officially inducted as Rector of the Parish of Kilkivan in a service in
Murgon conducted by his Grace, Archbishop Reginald Halse on 31 July
1944. Other signatures accompanying Archbishop Reginald's include the
Venerable Archdeacon Ernest Read Crittenden, C S P Blacklet, Norman
Michael, B H Downward and two Lay Readers from Cherbourg -- G Doola and
WJ Atkins.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register, 31 July 1944,
  Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 2}

The 1944 Year Book shows Rev Jull as rector with S S Fenwick as Synod
representative and Messrs R B Jeffries and J E Stanton as Wardens -- all
being long-serving, faithful members. Listed were eight centres of
worship. The communicants on roll numbered 264 with 62 baptisms, 48
confirmations and nine marriages plus 61 visits to five separate State
Schools within the Parish. Sunday Schools were established in Murgon,
Kilkivan, Goomeri, Boonara and Cherbourg with a total of 11 teachers,
144 children enrolled and an overall average attendance of 98 each
Sunday. The parish was rightly considered to be thriving.\footnote{Diocesan
  Year Book 1944}

Rev Jull began immediately to familiarize himself with the parish layout
and the congregations in his charge. His first regime of services, 2
July, the day after his arrival, began with five listed services -
7.00am, Murgon, Holy Communion -- attendance 27. This was followed by
9.30am, Goomeri; Kilkivan, 11.30am; Boonara, although listed for 2.00pm
was noted as `Wet, No Service'.

Rev Jull's practice of entering comments in the Memoranda section of the
service register is a feature of his incumbency, giving a clear insight
into the conditions of operation at the time and a valuable historical
record of important happenings in that era. The events of his 2 July day
concluded with 7.30pm Evensong in Murgon. His clear, flourishing
signature proudly accompanied each entry. Parishioners were, no doubt,
as keen to meet their new rector as he was to engage with his parish.

This pattern of services continued along similar lines over following
Sundays with variations to include smaller centres, some without
designated church buildings, such as Manumbar, Fat Hen Creek and Windera
-- all with acceptable levels of attendance. A note under Memoranda
records that at a Mission Service in Cherbourg Aboriginal Settlement on
19 July 1944, there were `about 47 present, including 12 adults' while 3
August 1944 records `nearly 60 present'. Boat Mountain's Tableland Hall
hosted its first service, a 3.00pm Evensong on 6 August with 18 in the
congregation.

13 August, again a busy day for the new Rector with five services in
all. The 2.00 pm service at Cloyna was followed by a meeting of local
parishioners, and rather abruptly recorded that the `Meeting at Cloyna
decided that services should be held at Windera.' No further explanation
ensued but services at Windera became a regular occurrence and continued
for many years in the Windera hall, until the `new church' was opened in
1958. H V Golding officiated at Evensong at Murgon. Manumbar is also
mentioned as receiving an August service. Parish Council minutes of 24
September 1944 showed the parish financial position as `in a good
position -- much better than for a considerable time previously.' As
always, rising running expenses needed to be addressed. With Boat
Mountain centre added in and Cherbourg, Windera and Manumbar now
regularly visited by the rector, an approximate figure of \pounds168 per month
was requested - an increase of \pounds60 -- and approved.\footnote{Kilkivan
  Parish Council Minutes, 24 September 1944, DJ 3 Box 3}

The parish participated in the 3 September National Day of Prayer with
Rev Jull officiating at five services marking the 5\textsuperscript{th}
Anniversary of the Outbreak of War. He noted that Murgon congregation
numbered 30, Goomeri 20 and Kilkivan as `Excellent. Church packed'. On 8
October 1944, Rev Jull `officially commissioned' as Lay Readers, Mr WJ
Atkins of Murgon and Geoffrey Doola of Cherbourg, though both had been
serving in this capacity for many years.

Further memoranda notes include: Manumbar -- No service. Mix up in
dates; Cherbourg -- Memorial service for chief world scout leader, late
Lord Somers -- parade of boy scouts; 26 October, Death of Archbishop of
Canterbury, Dr William Temple and a Requiem in his honour five days
later. November was also a busy month for memoranda notations: Trees
planted. Golden Cyprus in front of church; Cherbourg grant of \pounds25 per
annum from Home Missions as from 1 October plus a grant of six shillings
for hymn books and pictures for their Sunday School. Unplanned events
again caused some alterations to scheduled services with the 9.30am
Goomeri HC service being replaced by Prayers conducted by C Wimberley
due to rector's car trouble. Around this time, discussions commenced
regarding a car-replacement fund being organized.

Of special note is `Collection of special funds for lining of the Murgon
church' for its 25\textsuperscript{th} Anniversary. The church building,
dedicated on 18 April 1920, had not been lined until this time. No
estimate of costing is included nor who was to be engaged for the task.
Special milestones often inspire surges of activity to make the
celebration a `special event'. It appears that the seeking of a faculty
for Mr G Waldock's attractive Silky Oak altar was overlooked at the time
of installation as the Diocesan Register held in the Diocesan Records
and Archives Centre, Brisbane indicate: 24 September 1936 -- `A faculty
was this day issued authorising the erection in the Church of Christ
Murgon of an altar of Silky Oak with Cross in the centre and Credence
Table -- no objection having been raised.\footnote{Diocesan Records and
  Archives Faculty Register, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane} As they say,
`Better late than never!'

With the year drawing to a close, a flurry of extra activities is
indicated. November ended with a visit from the Archbishop of Brisbane,
the Most Reverend Reginald Halse who conducted confirmation services for
a total of 86 candidates being: Murgon 17; Goomeri 20; Cherbourg 31;
Kilkivan 17; Nanango 1. The following Sunday, 4 December, the First
Communion for candidates from both Murgon and Cherbourg was celebrated
with a combined attendance of 69. This was followed by 11.00am Morning
Prayer and prize giving in Kilkivan, a 5.00pm CAS prize giving and
Christmas tree and concluded with 7.30pm Evensong in Goomeri. Another
busy day! However, there were no services on 21 December due to
exceedingly wet conditions, thus allowing the rector an unscheduled
travel-free day, no doubt spent `in the office' by this energetic
priest.

The month concluded with the round of Christmas services starting on
Christmas Eve (Sunday) with a poorly attended (only six) 7.30am service
in Murgon with the wryly noted explanation -- `Dance the night before'!
Kilkivan congregation, however, made up for this with a congregation of
48 communicants. Goomeri and Boonara celebrated Christmas Eve with
Evensong -- also well attended.

Christmas Day 1944 began with a special HC service at 7.30am in Goomeri
where 28 communicants witnessed the dedication of brass candlesticks and
a silver bread box, donated by Mrs D Gittens and Miss I M Harrison in
memory of their mother, Mrs Harrison. This special occasion was also
mentioned in Rev Griffith's notes in the January 1945 \emph{Church
Chronicle}.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register, 25 December 1944
  AND \emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 January 1945, p. 25.} A total of 102
communicants celebrated Christmas, 1944, including 42 in Murgon, and 32
at Cherbourg. His busy Christmas round concluded with Rev Jull
administering the reserved sacrament at a Merlwood residence, ensuring
that all the faithful were able to join in the worship so precious to
many at Christmas.

The 1945 Year Book listing for Kilkivan Parish: Rev Jull as rector;
loyal lay readers - G Doola and W Atkins; Messrs E J D Stanley and P E
Seng, synodsmen; D L Jones and R B Jeffries, wardens; G Waldock, C M
Wimberley, D L Jones, parochial nominators. The same names keep popping
up throughout the years. The Year Book also mentions two Sunday School
teachers with 38 students enrolled and an average attendance of
30.\footnote{Diocesan Year Book 1945}

Rev Jull's notations record the Palm Sunday service (25 March) in Murgon
where 10 members were admitted to Girls Friendly Society (GFS). As a
follow-up to the earlier request (Ch. 9) from the parish, later that day
a meeting followed an 11.15am service at Booubyjan Homestead to discuss
its transfer to the Kilkivan Parish from Gayndah. A postal vote was to
be taken. A post scrip to the above states `No vote taken. Gayndah locum
tenens takes interest and visits Booubyjan. Rector advises Archbishop
who promises to see into the whole matter.'

2 September was a day of celebration throughout the parish, Australia,
and much of the world, marking the end of six long, troubled years of
world-wide war. The light of hope burned brightly and steadfast
resilience and Christian faith was rewarded with peace and renewed hope
for a brighter future. While many families mourned the loss of loved
ones, others rejoiced in the return of their sons and daughters, some of
whom had suffered severely at the hands of Japanese guards during
internment. There was a `rush' of long-delayed weddings.

As just one example, Christ Church hosted the wedding of Harry Lloyd
Tilney -- a descendant of the early Maudsley families -- to Olive Vera
Hay on 17 December 1945, Rev Jull officiating. The couple were engaged
prior to Harry's war service and subsequent 3 \nicefrac{1}{2} year internment in
Changi and the infamous Burma/Thailand railway, followed by forced
labour in coal mines in Japan until the war ended. Finally freed, Harry
returned to Australia in late October 1945. Harry's mother, Agnes Tilney
(Maudsley), helped make Olive's wedding dress and supplied the flowers
for the beautiful wedding bouquets. Jimmy Jones, a fellow POW, served as
best man while Olive was attended by her cousins Thelma O'Neill,
bridesmaid, and Jean Robinson, flower girl.\footnote{Information and
  Photo, courtesy Thyrene Cross (Tilney), daughter.}

Similarly, local Wooroonden farmer, Mr Bill Bradley, returned to his
wife Alice, and recovery from years of deprivation, to become a
prominent figure an Murgon life as a respected elected representative on
the Murgon Shire Council. He is mentioned in the Boonara Centenary Book
as being present when his friend, Boonara's Jack Jones lost his life
during action, an event which he quietly dealt with for the rest of his
life, only confiding details to a very few (perhaps just one) close
friends, and certainly not to his children. His son Arthur, who became a
Commonwealth boxing champion, expressed complete surprise and great
sadness at not having known these things while his father was alive.

While not exclusive, these two examples may serve to illustrate the
resilience of the human spirit in recovery from trauma. As the land is
changed by but recovers and re-grows after devastating events, so too
can human recovery is possible. Men do need to talk -- and especially to
each other, including their sons.

As the natural course of events weddings were followed by the joyful
arrival of children and subsequent baptisms. It was the beginning of
what was to become ``The Golden Years of the Parish'.

With this resurgence of energy, during 1945, some serious thought was
being given to the building of a new rectory. Progressing this proposal
seems to have been contingent upon the sale of other church property. A
`No sale' note was attached to the Minutes entry.\footnote{Kilkivan
  Parish Minutes 1945, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane, DJ 3 Box 2} Thus,
while being credited with making the initial moves in this direction,
Rev Jull left the parish in 1946 without seeing any further progress. A
similar story emerges from Kilkivan church centre's records, indicating
Rev Jull's influence in locally organized fund-raising to line and
extend their church building which was proving too small for current
congregations. `He called a special meeting to organise an appeal to
parishioners to be known as a ``Thanksgiving for Peace''\,'.\footnote{St
  Matthew's, Kilkivan, Centenary Booklet, p. 12} While not directly
connected to Christ Church's historical record, such information
underlines Rev Jull's enthusiasm for each and every centre under his
ministry care and, thus, the parish as a cohesive entity.

The death on 3 September 1945 of long-serving member, David Lacey Jones,
was a sad occasion for the whole parish. As noted in the Kilkivan
Centenary Booklet, (p. 12), Mr Jones had served as Kilkivan centre
church secretary from pre-1911 until his passing and was a sub-warden
for Kilkivan for many years before following in the footsteps of his
father, George Hall Jones, as People's Warden for the Parish. He was
laid to rest by Rev Jull the following day in the Jones family's private
cemetery on their property, Kilkivan Station.

As an endorsement of the good state of the spiritual aspect of the
parish a 1945 \emph{Church Chronicle} details the 22 and 23 November
visit to the parish by the Archbishop where 86 confirmation candidates
were presented with large crowds present at Murgon, Goomeri and Kilkivan
centres to witness the `laying on of hands'. The comment was made that
`86 new communicants should go a long way to filling some empty pews
each Sunday'.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 January 1945, p. 25
  Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}

Rev Jull was a frequent and consistent contributor of articles to the
Diocesan news publication, the \emph{Church Chronicle}. His contribution
from Kilkivan Parish to the \emph{Church Chronicle}, 1 January 1946,
giving information for the latter part of 1945, included:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  the election of Mr Ted Waldock to replace the late D L Jones as
  Kilkivan centre secretary
\item
  expressions of deep sympathy to Mr Christoffel and family, Goomeri, on
  the passing of his wife
\item
  a request for permission to proceed with a meeting with Boonara locals
  to discuss the Mander-Jones family's generous offer to erect gates to
  the church as a memorial to their son John (Jack), killed in action in
  Singapore and to effect repairs and alterations to St David's church.
\item
  Page 27 concluded with: `Our best wishes go out to Kathleen Cobb on
  the occasion of her marriage to Charles Braithwaite. Page 28 continued
  lamenting the fact that Kath had been GFS secretary and her services
  there would now be very much missed'.
\item
  Mention is made in this article of a fund for a Memorial Peace Window
  which `has reached \pounds75, Mrs J Tate deserves our best thanks for
  organizing this appeal, much of the success of which is due to her
  efforts.' (This is the first written record of moves for this window.
\item
  Mr Stubberfield is noted and thanked for drawing up plans for the
  window.
\item
  Sincere and heartfelt sympathy `is offered to Mr and Mrs Wrigley, who
  have now, after months and years of waiting, heard that their son,
  Kenneth, died in a Japanese prison camp.'
\item
  Cpl E J (Ned) Pickering (later with wife Madeline became very active
  in both Windera and Murgon centres) is mentioned as `currently a
  patient in Greenslopes Military Hospital. We trust his health will
  soon be restored.'\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle}, 1 January 1946,
    Pp 27/28, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}
\end{itemize}

The \emph{Church Chronicle} the next month (February):\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle,} 1 February 1946, p. 58, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  began with an account of well attended Christmas services together
  with a not-too-thinly-veiled `dig' at parishioners where he quipped
  `what a difference it would make if everyone would make the same
  effort every Sunday', going on to observe that it would not be `too
  hard' to find a service at a suitable time.
\item
  He extended sincere thanks to all who had helped throughout the
  previous year then went on to recognize the efforts of organizers of
  Prizegiving events throughout the parish. Lavish praise was rendered
  to Windera's event: `\ldots{} most spectacular being Windera where a
  Children's Fancy Dress Ball was held in conjunction with a Christmas
  Tree. More than 40 children came in fancy dress while parents and
  friends attended in such large numbers that there was standing room
  only, let alone dancing room. Our thanks to Mrs Beduhn and Miss
  Stephenson for acting as judges.'
\item
  For persons still enquiring, Rev Jull added His Grace the Archbishop's
  reminder of a previous decision that raising money by gambling was not
  desirable and that permits to conduct raffles for church functions
  cannot be obtained.
\end{itemize}

March's \emph{Church Chronicle} contribution\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle,} 1 March 1946, p. 90, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}
announced that:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  a visit by His Grace the Archbishop `has been set for
  14\textsuperscript{th} and 15\textsuperscript{th} May. Intending
  confirmation candidates not already attending classes are asked to
  contact the rector.'
\item
  `After evensong (10 March) a meeting of parishioners will be held at
  Windera to discuss the building of a Church. It is thought by members
  of the committee that the time is now opportune to make a general
  appeal for the funds.'
\item
  Other entries dealt with general details such as the donation of
  plants for a privet hedge in Murgon and ornamental lantana plants for
  the front garden -- a farewell to Miss Kathleen Cushing -- and the
  departure of Mr and Mrs F Walters from Boonara.
\item
  Cherbourg ladies were praised for raising \pounds7 towards the painting of
  their local church building.
\end{itemize}

As noted in Chapter three, Mr George Waldock Jr. had donated Christ
Church's original altar. Kilkivan Parish Minutes indicate faculties,
\emph{issued} in 1945 to `remove the existing altar and to replace it
with another in memory of Kenneth George Wrigley, A.I.F. and also to
remove existing Altar ornaments and replace them with new altar cross,
candlesticks and vases in silver plate'. \footnote{Kilkivan Parish
  Minutes, 1945, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}These decisions were
finally \emph{granted} official status by the Archbishop as noted in the
Diocesan Council meeting minutes of 31 September 1946. Due notice having
been given', along with the Brisbane Diocesan Records and Archives
Faculty Register's entry on 31 December 1946.\footnote{Diocesan Records
  and Archives Faculty Register 1946, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}As
always, the wheels grind slowly and carefully in these matters.

Rev Jull served the parish well during his two years as rector and was
ably assisted by his wife, Olwyn, who actively participated in
activities such as Guild and Mothers Union as well as being an
accomplished organist whose skills were greatly appreciated. On 15
September 1946 the Julls were farewelled with some sorrow by the
parishioners attending services in Murgon, Goomeri, Kilkivan and
Boonara. They left for their new parish of Holy Trinity, Woolloongabba
on 20 September with a grateful parish wishing them well in their future
years. \footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register, 28 December 1946,
  Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 2}

In 1949 Rev Jull returned to the South Burnett region as Rector, St
Michael and All Angels Church, Kingaroy until 1952. He then moved to St
Mary's parish, Redcliffe as Rector from 1952-1977 during which time he
also held the position of Rural Dean of Redcliffe from 1963. He was
appointed Hon. Canon St John's Cathedral in 1972, retired in 1977 and
had permission to officiate in the Diocese of Brisbane from 1978. His
death occurred in 1982.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Record, Diocesan
  Archives, Brisbane}

\section{1946--1947 : Rev Joseph Rodgers
Burns}

Rev J Rodgers-Burns came to the parish as locum following Rev Jull's
departure. He participated actively at all centres during his time with
the various congregations, though it is evident that transport to each
venue became a troubling issue due to the unreliability of the current
vehicle.

The installing of the Wrigley Family's donation of the `new (Memorial)
Altar' for Christ Church Murgon continued as a work-in-progress. An
invoice and receipt from the makers J Todd and Co

shows its cost of construction and supply as being \pounds\ldots{} The
document carries Joseph Rodgers Burns signature\emph{.}\footnote{Copy or
  Invoice and Receipt, courtesy Donna Hindley (granddaughter of Mrs
  Wrigley and niece of Kenneth Wrigley).} Faculties for the altar and
for the candlesticks and crucifer were granted by His Grace the
Archbishop in December 1946.\footnote{Diocesan Records and Archives
  Faculty Register, 1946, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane} In her Will, a
Mrs Sylvia St George Dixon indicated a bequest of \pounds50 to the Church of
England, Goomeri, being a share of \pounds425 for distribution to various
churches within the Brisbane Diocese probably used to assist in
operating the local Sunday School.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence
  file, 16 February 1947, Diocese Archives, Brisbane}

Wrigley family again donated generously to the church as a later item in
the 25 March 1947 Diocesan Archives record: `A faculty was this day
issued to Christ Church, Murgon, authorising the introduction of a
silver sanctuary lamp into the church.'\footnote{Diocesan Records and
  Archives Faculty Register 1947, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane} The lamp
was dedicated at Easter that year. A plaque on the church wall reads:
`In memory of George Edward Bromfield and Christopher Rodgers. Lit by
Mrs Wrigley, Easter 1947. A gift of their relatives'. The lamp still
resides happily in the church, but it has been altered from an oil
burner, which had to be lowered by chains to be refilled, to electric
power. The red bulb burns constantly.

A ` Special Meeting' of the parish was held in the Goomeri CWA rooms on
9 February 1947. It must have been considered `very important' as a
typed copy of the minutes, rather than the usual hand-written ones, was
pasted into the parish minutes book.

Rev Rodgers Burns was not present. Each centre was represented, being: R
B Jeffries (Chair), Messrs Jones, Atkins, Gedge, Zahnleiter, Sempf,
Quinn, H Stanton, Tate, Tapsall, Waldock and Sing with apologies from
Messrs Pearson, R McIntosh, W Heathwood, P Stumm and W Short.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Mr Jeffries stated that the meeting had been called for `\ldots the
  express purpose of discussing the attitude of the Diocesan
  representatives on the Presentation Board, Brisbane, and the apparent
  undue delay in the appointment of a Rector.'
\item
  After lengthy discussion a motion was put and passed to write to the
  Presentation Board and `deplore the delay in making an appointment'
  and that they `considered the delay detrimental to the work and
  spiritual welfare of the parish.'
\end{itemize}

On a more general basis:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The various centres reported on their current financial positions.
\item
  Mr C Wimberley had left the district. His former positions were filled
  by Mr Len Sempf as a Parochial Nominator and Mr Keen as Goomeri centre
  secretary.
\item
  The meeting carried a motion to purchase a replacement parish car,
  such purchase to be overseen by a five-member committee: Parish
  rector's and people's wardens plus Messrs Stanton (Goomeri), Waldock
  (Kilkivan) and M Maudsley (Windera).
\item
  A letter of appreciation was to be sent to C Bischoff for making his
  own car available for use by the rector in the interim.
\item
  The old issue of `where the rector should reside' again emerged with a
  notice-of-motion by L Sempf to be presented at the next meeting
  suggesting that the rector should reside in Goomeri instead of Murgon.
\end{itemize}

The meeting concluded with Afternoon Tea prepared and presented by the
Ladies of the Goomeri Guild who were accorded a hearty vote of
thanks.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Minutes, May 1947, Diocesan Archives,
  Brisbane, DJ 3 Box 2}

The 1947 Annual General Meeting was held on 25 May, as per tradition, in
Goomeri CWA rooms. Twenty-two persons were listed as present, including
now familiar names plus more interest being shown from outer centres
with G C Quinn and L Eland (Boonara) along with Windera representatives,
M Maudsley and C Noffke entering the scene on a regular basis. K Beitzel
was listed a secretary.

Apologies: W Short, W Atkins and Reece (Bill) Mander-Jones. As the
parish was in the hands of a locum tenens, the position of rector's
warden was left open. All other office bearer positions were filled, and
parish councillors nominated and elected -- Kilkivan five
representatives; Murgon, four; Goomeri, four; Boonara, three; Windera,
three; Cherbourg (CAS), one; Manumbar, one. The only business arising
from the minutes related to the purchase of a new motor vehicle. As no
significant progress had been made the matter was held over and left in
abeyance.

The services register contains several notes of interest including the
granting, by His Grace the Archbishop, of faculties. The Faculties
Register confirms these as being for the new altar and another entry
noting the founding of the Church of England Tennis Club, 29 May 1947.

Rodgers Burns actively participated in all aspects of ministry during
his relatively short though events packed time of service. The 4 May
1947 services register indicates six services conducted that day -- five
conducted by Rev Rodgers Burns and one by lay reader, W Atkins. An entry
dated 11 May 1947 under Rev J Rodgers Burns signature seems to have been
the last service conducted in the Parish by him. This is followed by a
couple of isolated entries indicating occasional services conducted in
Murgon by Lay persons, Mr Atkins, Murgon and Mr Doola of Cherbourg.
Several blank pages follow.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register,
  1923 -- 1947, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane, DJ 3 Box 2}

A page (not numbered) from the May 1947 minutes register refers to a
parish council meeting held in the absence of a priest and chaired by
the warden. Prolonged discussion on the purchasing committee's report
resulted in majority decision and the motion of Mr Tate, seconded by W
Atkins, authorising the wardens to proceed with purchase of a new
Chevrolet motor car for the parish. This was carried unanimously. R
Mander Jones' (Boonara) recommendation `that the matter of any finance
required could be taken up with the diocesan secretary', along with
Tate's suggestion that `a collector be appointed from each centre' for
donations to this project. The meeting gratefully accepted Mr Gedge's
generous offer of a \pounds60 pledge for 12 months interest free loan deposit
for purchase. The wardens were requested to make every effort to obtain
an increase in rebate from the dealer. A welcome afternoon tea, provided
by the Goomeri Guild followed closure of the May 1947
meeting.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Minutes, May 1947, p. 109, Diocesan
  Archives, Brisbane, DJ 3 Box 2} (These minutes were officially signed
by Rev Alan Thompson at a 1948 parish council meeting.)

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1947--1954 : Rev Alan George
Thompson}

Alan George Thompson was ordained deacon in 1914 and a priest in 1915
after completing his Theological studies at Warminster College, UK. He
travelled widely during his ministerial life, having served firstly as a
Member of the Brotherhood of St Boniface in Bunbury -- a small village
in Cheshire on the Shropshire canal until 1917. He then served as AIF
Chaplain 1917-1919 before his traveling urge brought him as
Priest-in-Charge in Western Australia till 1921, a short period on New
South Wales, then into Queensland where most of the rest of his life was
spent. Again, he covered a lot of territory and differing roles -
Soldiers' Settlement Chaplain based in Fortitude Valley, Toowoomba, Mary
Valley, Ipswich, several short stays in Brisbane suburbs until the
second world war again saw him acting as chaplain, this time to the AMF.
Thus, he was not in the first flush of youth when service register
entries commenced for Rev Thompson, on his arrival as Priest-in Charge
of the Parish of Kilkivan, his signature appearing in the register of
services 21 December 1947. In 1948 he was granted Rectorship of the
parish which he retained until his departure from the area in
1954.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records, Diocesan Archives Centre,}

At a general meeting of the parish council soon after his arrival, the
parish warden opened the meeting by welcoming Rev Thompson, hoping that
`his stay would be a happy one and that the parish would build up again'
under his guidance. Apologies from D Baulch, M Maudsley, P Seng, H P
Stanton and L Eland were duly recorded.

The ever-present and concerning issue of finance, as alluded to in the
previous chapter, was once again a meeting focus. In the nine-month
absence of an incumbent, no monies had been forwarded by, or received
from, any of the six centres. The parish appears to have drifted
aimlessly, like a boat without a rudder, in the absence of a priest.
Ministry (including funerals) had been provided almost entirely by a
small band of lay persons. As a remedial action, the treasurer and
wardens asked, firmly, that a one quarter's assessment from each centre
be paid by 31 January. All agreed to this. The secretary was directed to
contact the diocesan secretary requesting a reduction in parish
assessment as a further effort to regain some financial ground.
\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Minutes 1947, p. 108 l, Diocesan Archives,
  Brisbane DJ 3 Box 3} The parish assessment was seen as an added burden
to a community which was already enduring the many sacrifices expected
of all in the effort to maintain Australia's overseas war effort and so
protect Australia from invasion.

The Diocesan response was that, regretfully, no relief would be able to
be considered for the present assessment, but next year some
consideration could be given, based on the current year's income.

The new Rector, Rev Alan Thompson chaired the 9 May 1948 parish AGM but
did not present a rector's report, having only fairly recently arrived
in the parish.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The financial report was adopted subject to audit.
\item
  The election of officers resulted in R Mander Jones (Boonara)
  accepting Rev Thompson's invitation to act as rector's warden. R B
  Jeffries was appointed as people's parish warden; Mr Monteith as
  auditor; parish nominators -- J W Tate, L Sempf, H P Stanton. K
  Beitzel was re-elected secretary/treasurer.
\item
  The parish council consisted of 12 elected members -- Quinn, Noffke,
  Maudsley, Stanton, Pearson, Zahnleiter, Tapsall, Waldock, Gedge,
  Livingstone, and Eland, along with the ex-officio members and the
  rector.
\item
  Mr L Sempf spoke to his previous notice of motion `that the rector be
  stationed in Goomeri as it is (geographically) the centre of the
  parish. Much detailed discussion concerning running costs, distances
  involved from each of the two possible centres, the main hospital
  being situated in Wondai, and so on. Murgon parishioners received
  special mention for being the only centre to offer their private
  vehicles for ministerial use each Sunday. An `advisory only' committee
  consisting of the parish wardens plus one people's sub-warden from
  each centre was formed to further investigate general opinion.
\end{itemize}

A budget for the year ahead was presented. Financial obligations to
basic running costs - stipend, phone, synod assessment etc -were
estimated at \pounds556 which included an overdraft of \pounds20. Of foremost
importance to the budget was the `new car' project. The committee which
had been appointed for this purpose had used its authority in this
regard and proceeded, through church member and local car dealer, Mr
Bischoff, with negotiations for the purchase in the absence of an
incumbent Their decision was no doubt influenced by Mr Gedge's
(gratefully accepted) offer of a \pounds60 interest free loan for twelve
months as a deposit, and by Mr Bischoff's to service the vehicle. By
December 1947, a letter to the Diocese stated that as `the parish can
raise \pounds200 almost immediately', they wished to apply for an overdraft of
\pounds450 at the National Bank to complete the purchase of a `Stylemaster'
Chevrolet. This overdraft carried the requirements that it be reduced by
at least \pounds150/pa over a three-year period. At this May 1948 meeting, to
cover this expenditure fully, the vehicle's purchase price of \pounds685 was
allocated in quota form to each centre: Murgon \pounds216; Kilkivan and
Goomeri \pounds161 each; Boonara \pounds107 and Windera \pounds40.\footnote{Kilkivan
  Parish Minutes 1947/1948, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 3}

The matter of increased costs incurred in servicing the Cherbourg
community was discussed. A motion by R Mander Jones and seconded by P
Seng authorised the secretary to contact Canon Massey in this regard and
seeking assistance. It further pointed out that Mr W Atkins regularly
attended to church matters there, usually riding his bicycle there and
back. Messrs P Sing and R Mander Jones asked that `an appreciation for
Mr Atkins' good work at Cherbourg and all who had made their cars
available for the Rector while the parish was without one.' Mr Jeffries
and Mr Atkins responded with `If a job is worth doing, it is worth doing
well!'

Current parish members in fairly significant numbers recall Rev
Thompson's incumbency with a deal of warmth. Being slightly vision
impaired from desert sand in the Middle East, on his arrival in the
parish, Rev Thompson was greeted by Mr Bernard ``Bill'' Gedge who,
subsequently, frequently drove him around the Parish in a brand new, big
heavy Chevrolet sedan. As recalled by Mr I D (Mick) Kapernick, they were
often bogged in the wet weather, particularly in going out to Windera --
a telling comment on the road conditions at the time. Local
reminiscences paint a fond and positive picture of Rev Thompson
referring often to `his little eccentricities', such as singing,
\emph{loudly,} the alternate tune while the congregation and the
organist ploughed on with the familiar one. He is also renowned for
using his strong, booming voice on occasion if he felt the congregation
might be falling asleep in a 2.00pm service on a long, hot summer's
afternoon. The problem was that occasionally he awakened sleeping babies
as well as the adults, much to the distress of the mothers who then had
a crying child to pacify, though an escape to the shade outside may have
been a welcome interlude. He is also credited with using a whole jugful
of water -- often a little cooler than tepid -- to douse babies
presented for baptism, not so well received by the little ones in
winter! The life of the parish continued in this congenial fashion
providing a needed sense of security within the fabric of a
war-tarnished environment.\footnote{Anecdotes collected during
  interviews and research (M McIntosh)}

15 August 1945 was a momentous day for Australia marking the end of
World War II. Certainly, it was a day of note for Murgon's community who
now eagerly awaited the return of the final batches of local troops.
Although overseas conflict ended, the ongoing effects on the home
countries remained. While Australians civilians, generally speaking, did
not suffer as much as many other populations (eg. the UK), the impact on
our home front remained significant for several more years.

A 1949 notation mentions `Ration Coupon Day' on 27 November and a street
stall operated by the Murgon Guild ladies being held to celebrate the
end of wartime rationing and to provide a needed boost to finances and
to morale with events taking on a more `normal' face.\footnote{Parish of
  Kilkivan Service Register, 27 November 1949, Diocesan Archives, DJ 3
  Box 2} The rectory garden, happily attended by Rev Thompson throughout
his stay in Murgon (most likely with the assistance of Bill Gedge)
provided fruit and some vegetables which he liked to distribute to any
of the ladies of the parish who were willing to turn them into jams and
pickles for church stalls and catering purposes.\footnote{Murgon Ladies
  Guild Minutes and Cash Book 1940-1966 entries. Parish files, Murgon.}

Rev Thompson was never seen dressed in anything but his Khaki army style
clothing -- another of his apparently endearing eccentricities. Being a
bachelor seems to have triggered the `mothering instinct'. The ladies of
the parish took him under their wings with one who did all his washing
and ironing - and there were many others, several in each centre, who
vied for the honour of feeding him in the times between services in each
of the centres. On occasions such as the gap between an afternoon
service and one around 7.00 pm in outlying centres, he was provided with
a bed for a well-deserved rest before his evening meal, both intended to
sustain him till bedtime.

Apart from all of this, in addition to the regular run of services, Rev
Thompson was very keen to instruct children and ensured there were
Sunday School Classes in all the centres, conducting them himself if
necessary, adding extra working hours to already crowded days. At
Windera, church services and Sunday School classes were conducted in the
old Windera Community Hall. Every Christmas each child was given a prize
book, chosen, and signed by the Rector. He loved `Westerns' and his
choice of prize books certainly showed where his recreational reading
interests lay, though some may question the spiritual relevance of
titles such as `Gun Law'. The Parish's Sunday Schools prospered with up
to 100 children attending at various centres with Murgon at the
forefront. Credit must also be given to Mr Gedge for his enthusiasm and
generosity of time in providing teaching, as well as being Murgon's
Sunday School superintendent and recruiting a dedicated band of
committed teachers.\footnote{Murgon Services Register, 27 November 1949,
  Diocesan Archives, DJ 3 Box 2}

Ross Waldock writes of the Sunday School: `My first memory is of Sunday
School in 1953 (I think) before I started school. Teachers were Mr Bill
Gedge, Miss Edith Gedge and Mr Bill Atkins (who rode a bike). I hated
Sunday School -- John Mickan teased me till I cried. Mr Gedge took me
home to Mum and Dad -- but I was sent back next week. Sunday School was
held in the vestry and in the church. The Christmas break-up was in the
Town Hall supper rooms -- fantastic!\footnote{Personal notes supplied by
  Ross Waldock.}

During these years Murgon church, and indeed the whole parish, could be
described as active, enthusiastic and dedicated, with regular
sacramental services of confirmation, baptism and marriage. The
recurring problem of having adequate finances to cover all contingencies
was ever present.

In 1948 Rev Charles Tunstall, after nine years as Rector of St John's,
Biggenden, retired to McLucas Street, Murgon. As is always the case,
clergy persons never `retire' completely and his name began to appear as
the officiating priest in the Murgon church's services register, an
undoubtedly welcome assistance to Rev Thompson.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy
  Records, Diocesan Archives Centre, Brisbane}




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/JackDennienGladysMorgan12Jan1951.jpg}
\caption{Jack Dennien and Gladys Morgan 12 January 1951}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


Social, community-based activities were greatly encouraged with a view
to presenting the parish to the general public as a vibrant, welcoming
community open to all as well as a means of augmenting funds. As an
example, a call went out for young women to participate in a Debutante
Ball being organized by Church of England volunteers, including Mrs
Seng. The successful advertising campaign brought a bevvy of beautiful
young ladies to the Murgon Town Hall. As reported in 7 October 1950
\emph{Courier Mail,} Brisbane, Missies Merle Towne, Pauline Bennett,
Heather Waldock, Alma Beutel, Heather Evans, Norma Towne, Veronica
Nichol, Dulcie Holznagel, Daphne Raddacliffe, Winnifred Noffke,
Elizabeth Reese, Beryl Harm and May Solomon - and their equally handsome
young escorts to the Murgon Town Hall where they were presented to the
Venerable Archdeacon Frank Knight.\footnote{\emph{Courier Mail,}
  Brisbane, 7 October, 1950}

Entries in the parish services register and articles from the
\emph{Church Chronicle} both indicate a proliferation of activities
during 1952. The first of three successive monthly articles in the
diocesan news publication occurred in March where the rector announced
that `Canon Massey is visiting this Parish for Mothering Sunday (23
March). I have asked him to Bless the Memorials in Christ
Church.'\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} March 1952, Diocesan
  Archives, Brisbane} As described in the previous chapter, the
cessation of hostilities and the coming of peace in 1945 moved the
grateful and grieving Murgon community to give visible expression in the
form of various memorials in the church. The most forward-looking
venture, and indeed a large step in faith, considering the expense
involved, was the decision to install a stained glass, leadlight window
in honour of the local fallen and as a Peace Memorial in the wall of the
church behind the altar.

While the parish services register for March carried many memoranda
notations indicating heavy rain interrupting some services in Kilkivan
and Goomeri, a week later it also confirms that Rev Canon R B Massey,
(organizing secretary of the Home Missions Board) was present to `bless
the memorials in the church'.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Services
  Register, 30 March 1952, Diocesan Archives, DJ 3 Box 2} Again,
anecdotal evidence indicates that the said `memorial' was indeed the
beautiful war memorial window. This striking Silky Oak framed tribute to
the local `fallen servicemen' measures 1.46m x 1.18m, is formed in three
sections and bears the inscription `To the Glory of God and in
Thanksgiving for Peace, August 1945. These windows are erected by the
Parishioners of Christ Church

Murgon'\footnote{Photos and information from Diocesan Archives Centre,
  Brisbane and courtesy Donna Hindley, Murgon.}. A `Sung Eucharist' at
11.00 am, Murgon, was a highlight on this last Sunday of March and
included a `retiring collection for Red Cross'. An 8.00 pm parish
council meeting in Goomeri followed.

More memoranda items from1952 included the admission of nine candidates
to GFS and the `making of one associate' during September and the
October events including a visit by the Rural Dean, E R Crittenden who
received Debutantes in the Murgon Town Hall and a Kilkivan children's
fancy-dress ball. During November Redgate Sunday School held its
prizegiving party and Hostel Prizes were also presented to `McCosker and
Twible'. Boonara and Kilkivan followed suit also in November, with both
events following services of evensong.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan
  Services Register, September and October 1952, Diocesan Archives,
  Brisbane, DJ 3 Box 2}

1953 Services Registers: 3 May, the parish hosted an Archdeaconal
visitation by the Venerable F B C Birch for the blessing of three
pictures which had been donated to the Murgon church. Following local
custom, local AGMs were held at each centre prior to the Parish AGM,
which was held on Wednesday 20 May at 7.30 pm following a service o0f
evensong.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Services Register, 3 May and 20
  May, 1953, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 2S} The parish hosted
the 18 October 1953 visit by Archbishop Reginald Halse where he
officially dedicated `the new work' which involved extensions to St
David's church, Boonara, dedicated the new front gates in memory of John
(Jack) Mander-Jones (killed in action 1942) and consecrated the burial
grounds within the church ground perimeters. These had been a Jones
Family private cemetery but now became an official Church of England
cemetery area.\footnote{St David's, Boonara, centenary booklet p. 15}

The main events for Murgon in December 1953 are neatly summarized in the
\emph{Church Chronicle.}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  The Murgon GFS break-up party was an outstanding success with around
  50 present. Presentations were made to president, Miss B M Delpratt
  (BA), and secretary Miss Maureen Olsen.
\item
  Murgon Sunday School's prizegiving followed a `reverential' Advent 2.
  Prizes were distributed and presentations made to Mr Gedge
  (superintendent), Miss Edith Gedge and Mrs Beinke (organist).
\item
  Thanks were extended to all who made the 4 December Christmas Tree
  event such a hilarious event, with a special mention to Mr Richardson
  who acted as Santa (Saint Nicolas).
\item
  Mr Thompson advised that the next parish council meeting was scheduled
  for 31 January 1954 at 2.00pm in Goomeri. Women's Guilds were asked to
  send at least two representatives.
\end{itemize}

Rev Thompson's article ended with a parting message for the whole
parish:

\begin{quote}
`I feel the time has come for me, in the interests of the Church, to
make place for someone younger than I am. To make this decision has not
been easy. Most people when asked what the happiest time of their life
has been, refer the questioner to their childhood days. The happiest
time of my life has been whilst Rector of Kilkivan Parish. This has been
effected by the loyal co-operation and kindliness of the people whose
souls have been entrusted to my care. May my successor be as happy as I
have been!

A happy and prosperous New Year to you all'.
\end{quote}

The final diocesan news publication for Kilkivan parish by Mr Thompson
was on 14 February 1954. His `last notes' were written from the rectory
in Hamilton, Brisbane, where the spaciousness, `exquisite carpets and
curtains', `sumptuous furnishings' and spacious verandahs made him feel
like being `in Buckingham Palace' with gardens `reminiscent of
fairyland', not to mention the abundant access to running hot and cold
water -- what a contrast after the rather run-down premises in Murgon.
After waxing lyrical he went on to inform that his next `place of abode'
would be Charleville where he would `assist members of the Brotherhood
which has its headquarters there, but not be a member of that
self-sacrificing company of priests'. With a few brief notes covering
the Goomeri Sunday School end of year celebrations and Murgon's
Christmas Dance, he concluded with \emph{`\,''Goodbyes'' will be too
painful, so we will be casual when parting, as Mr Stanley was when he
found Dr Livingstone in Central Africa after searching for him over a
long period, under trying conditions. He simply said, ``Dr Livingstone,
I presume''. For the last time -- AGT'}.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicles} 1 January and 1 and 14 February 1954, Diocesan Archives,
  Brisbane}

His final entries in the parish services register were on 28 February
1954. His last day's duties covered four centres -- 7.30am, Murgon;
10.45am. Windera; 2.00pm, Boonara and 7.30pm, Kilkivan. Diligent to the
final minutes of his tenure! He signs off with the bland notation:
`Rector resigns and leaves for Brotherhood headquarters', dated 4 March
1954.

An archives-held letter signed by J Tate as secretary for the parish
nominators voiced sincere regret at Thompson's departure and glowing
praise for his work as `\ldots unsurpassed by any of his predecessors
\ldots{} improvement in parish immense \ldots{} sermons a delight to
listen to \ldots can leave the parish feeling very proud.' The letter
continued with arrangements towards the acceptance of Rev J Kruger as
Vicar.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence, 16 January 1954, Diocesan
  Registry Files 1954}

Clergy records indicate his final years were spent at St Alban's Clergy
House, Weinholt Street, Auchenflower.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records,
  Diocesan Archives Centre, Brisbane} It is seldom a parish is blessed
with a priest that `everybody loved' and who seemed to so thoroughly
enjoy and appreciate absolutely everything. God bless you Rev Alan
George Thompson.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1954--1956 : Rev Jack Kruger}

The arrival of Rev Jack Kruger (1923-1978) introduced a vibrant and busy
time for the Church of England in Murgon. The youthful enthusiasm of
this 31-year-old priest was contagious. Rev Thompson's parting statement
that the parish was ready for `a much younger man' proved prophetic in
spite of the tears which accompanied his departure. Rev Kruger had the
reputation of being a `good, down to earth Aussie'\footnote{Kilkivan
  Centenary Booklet, p. 14} and quickly gained the support of all. He
was very well regarded throughout the parish from the very beginning.
Having served as vicar of the parish of Mary Valley for two years before
his promotion to rector of Kilkivan Parish, he had been introduced to
the rigors of country parish service. Diocesan Registry Files, 1954,
contain copies of documents and correspondence between the parish
nominators, J Tate, L Sempf and HP Stanton, and the diocesan registrar,
Mr St John, regarding the appointment of Rev Kruger to the parish.

By 17 February the minimum stipend payable was \pounds625. The parish's
agreement to this figure, along with the rectory accommodation, a 1953
Holden Sedan parish car plus all running costs and repairs was offered
in communications with the Diocesan officials. All necessary paper work
for the appointment of Rev J Kruger was also completed by 15 February
1954. As mentioned in the previous chapter, the rectory was as `the
rather run-down premises in Murgon'. Some minor repairs were carried out
but much remained to bring the premises up to acceptable standards. It
seems this did not receive attention as fully as was required, although
the Guild is credited with supplying some blinds, some cupboards and
`Lino for the purchase of a motor mower. However, Rev Kruger's buoyant
approach was not daunted.

The first services register entry to his name was for 7 March 1954 where
he signed in full, ``Jack Kruger'. Thereafter, the simple initials, JK,
was all he ever used. Mention is made of a 6.30am special `Lady Day
Mass' for 16 communicants on 25 March. Mothers Union members frequently
used bus transport to travel to special joint services in other parishes
for these celebration days.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register,
  7 March 1954, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 2} Rev Kruger,
following in the footsteps of his predecessor, was a diligent
contributor to the Diocesan issued \emph{Church Chronicle}, a
well-received and anticipated publication in this parish. Written late
in March 1954 in time for the April edition, he mused on the privilege
for those in attendance at the `very special service in St John's
cathedral, Brisbane, in honour of Her Majesty the Queen and the Duke of
Edinburgh, Prince Philip,' during their Australian tour. He expressed
his gratitude and thanks to Rev Thompson `for seeing to the rectory
lawns and leaving the car in such good order'. He gave forward notice of
the Easter services, the parish AGM, 16 May @ 10.45 in Goomeri, and the
availability of Lenten Boxes, as well as encouraging parishioners to
support the Easter Play to be presented by the local GFS
group.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 April 1954, p. 123, Diocesan
  Archives, Brisbane}

Rev Kruger's official `Introduction and Induction' was conducted by
Canon ER Crittenden in an 8.00pm service in Murgon on Thursday 8 April
1954, thereby marking the beginning of a two-year, event-packed
incumbency. Over 100 people attended.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services
  Register, 8 April 1954} The occasion was written up in the May
\emph{Church Chronicle} where the rector fondly recalled that the
Gympie-based Rev Crittenden had conducted a similar service for him in
the parish of Mary Valley two years earlier. The Murgon Ladies' Guild's
appeal for contributions to the up-coming Annual Fete in the Murgon Town
Hall was advertised.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 May 1954, p.
  155} Support was forthcoming and, `in spite of the inclement weather'
the 8 June event netted \pounds114'.

The fete was officially opened by Mrs Florence Bjelke-Petersen,
Kingaroy, wife of the then local member of parliament and later premier,
Sir Joh.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 July 1954, p. 218} July
news continues: At the parish AGM held in Goomeri, there was concern for
the state of parish finances. Though in an overall `fairly sound'
position there was a large overdraft to be dealt with. Various
suggestions for an `all-out effort' were put forward. Rev Kruger took a
proactive approach and along with office bearers, including the
re-elected D Jeffries as People's Warden and C V Lord (Boonara),
secretary and treasurer, he employed leadership talents in organizing
several of the suggested money raising events. These included Amateur
Trials (Talent Quest event) and a Motor Gymkhana -- both fresh
approaches aimed at promoting general and wide-spread community
involvement.

The Amateur Trials received first attention with events planned for and
supported by participants from all parts of the area. Murgon, Windera,
Goomeri and Kilkivan centres actively planned and organized events over
August and September, uncovering a wealth of largely untapped talent
throughout the district. (On a personal note, I recall taking part, as a
newly turned 13-year-old, playing a piano solo ``Dreams of Youth'' in
the Windera/Cloyna organized event, in the Cloyna Hall.

My father also did his `strong man' tricks, bending iron rods across the
back of his neck and on his bottom jaw. Neither of us made the finals).
Finalists from these wonderful, fun-filled lead-ups gathered for the
culmination in Goomeri's Hall of Memory on 22 September for a `finals
night never to be forgotten'. That night alone made over \pounds180. Local
businesses were gratefully thanked for sponsoring its broadcast over
local radio station 4SB, which was compared by Mr George Parker, a 4SB
announcer. The euphoria of success led to the voicing of `plans' to `do
it again next year' being forthcoming.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,}
  1 November 1954, p. 346}

While the main emphasis was on these talent quests during this time,
forward planning in November 1954 went ahead for the Motor Gymkhana with
5 March 1955 being fixed for its staging in Goomeri, following an
initial planning meeting in October where all were encouraged to attend
and to `bring along your ideas and suggestions'.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle,} 1 October 1954, p. 315} The event was coupled with an
underlining parish appeal emphasising efforts to `remove the overdraft'.
Local areas pitched in during this time by organizing further
fundraising and social events.

Reflecting the popularity of ballroom dancing at the time, prominent
among these were imaginative approaches such as the 2 October Ballerina
Ball in the Tansey Hall and Goomeri's Annual Ball in the town's Memorial
Hall also in October. A very happy, and purely social, combined guilds
get-together was also held in Murgon during November. The usual Guild
efforts of running street stalls and functions catering also need to be
acknowledged along with `pleasing attendances' at church services
throughout the parish. October is remembered in Kilkivan as the time
`when the lights came on' -- referring to the connection to the
electricity supply grid and the dedication by Rev Kruger of a generous
donation of lights for the church by the Sempf family in memory of
departed family.

Windera congregation was complemented for attendances which `underlined
the necessity for a church (building) for that centre' adding that `they
desire only a small building and not much debt'.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle,} 1 August 1954, p. 250 ff} By the October edition of the
\emph{Church Chronicle} Rev Kruger was able to report the purchase of
two blocks of land for this purpose and that the `aim was for the church
to be built in 12 months.' October was reported as `a month of very bad
storms' with Kilkivan church being partly unroofed. Mr Jack Krebs and
his team of builders was on the scene early the next morning and the
work completed in a couple of days. Thankfully, insurance monies covered
the cost of repairs.

By December, with plans for Christmas events and the rector's annual
holidays were well underway. Parishioners were directed to the
\emph{South Burnett Times} for service details for Christmas and January
services. During the rector's absence the parish would be `attended by
the kind offer of Rev Charles Tunstall', previously mentioned as being
retired and residing in Murgon.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1
  December 1954, p. 378}

With 1954 drawing towards its close, rector and parishioners were able
to reflect on a year of progress in the growth of spiritual development
leading to physical evidence of this in so many ways. The Venerable
Archdeacon Crittenden again graced the parish during Bible Week in
September and was guest speaker at the Murgon Town Hall where he
addressed a large crowd on `The Authority of the Bible'. Necessary
repairs and improvements to the rectory had been carried out mid-year.
Several large anonymous donations had been forthcoming for different
projects. Electricity from the `grid' was beginning to be connected in
the area instead of local town power plants. Kilkivan was the first
centre to be connected to this system. Additional schools had been added
to the rector's visiting list, and, although as always happens,
concerning or sad occasions such as illness and the passing of valued
members had occurred, on the whole, it was a year to be celebrated.

The momentum continued into 1955 with grid-connection for electricity
supplies progressing well. Windera Guild minutes, a copy of which has
the date of May 1955 printed above the hand-written record deal with the
plans for the new church of St Katharine's (the originally chosen name),
stump-capping ceremony, which was to be a `festive occasion' with,
flags, stalls and a sumptuous Afternoon Tea.\footnote{Windera Ladies
  Guild minutes, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box 3} Letters in the
diocesan registry's correspondence file as well as a the record in the
an old, faded and damaged, Parish Service Register, assumed to belong to
Kilkivan, located by diocesan archivist, Glenda Murrell, the
stump-capping ceremony for `the proposed St Katharine's Church at
Windera' took place in 1955.

The comprehensive local notes in the 1 December 1955 \emph{Church
Chronicle} speak of the donation to Murgon church by the centre's guild
-- a picture in memory of Mr Beinke `who for a number of years was
organist at the church'. Prior notice was given of a Carols Service by
the choir in Murgon on 18 December and duly confirmed by the service
register entry of that date. Timber for the Windera church was gradually
being purchased, endorsing the hopes of starting the construction early
in the new year. Electricity was now connected to Boonara church with
thanks going out the generous person who completed the installation. The
rector was exceptionally pleased with the newly-formed Men's Committee
who had voluntarily painted the church and lined the vestry, providing
great assistance to the parish and the local ladies guild funds
reserves.

Throughout the year the usual occasional services of weddings, baptisms
and funerals continued. With the Methodist-run students' hostel just two
doors down from the church, there was an `on-tap' supply of high
school-aged students for confirmation lessons. And so the forward
momentum had continued there, and indeed, throughout the entire parish,
for the remainder of 1955.

Rev Kruger concluded his December notes with `My wife and children have
now returned to the rectory. Mrs Kruger is feeling really well again and
we wish to express our thanks to those people for their good wishes and
kind acts.'\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle,} 1 December 1954, p. 367}
Sadly this optimistic entry was followed by the dear lady's tragic
death, recorded in a simple one line entry in the services register: 16
December, 7.30am, attendance 2, Requiem for D P Kruger, signed JK.
Clergy Records record her as `Spouse Dorothy Patricia (nee Hardy). Died
1955.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}

While most parishioners were either totally unaware, or knew very little
of this devastating event, it was a difficult time for the wardens of
the parish and those closely associated with the rector as they
endeavoured to protect his privacy while he bravely carried on and
faithfully completed the full round of four tightly time-scheduled
Christmas Services beginning with a Sung Eucharist in Murgon at
midnight, an early service at Kilkivan followed by Boonara, then 11.00am
at Goomeri. Windera was catered for by Rev Chas Tunstall at 8.30am. In
all 139 people received their Christmas Holy Communion. Services
thereafter were conducted by Rev Tunstall (occasionally assisted by Mr
Stuart James, a lay person locally stationed with the Department of
Agriculture and Stock) beginning 1 January 1956 while Rev Kruger was on
official compassionate leave. He returned briefly in February 1956,
conducting and recording services on the first and second Sundays,
beneath which he wrote and duly signed: `Rector appointed to Kilkoy
Parish 14 February 1956'.\footnote{Kilkivan Parish Services Register,
  December 1955 and January onwards 1956.}

A specially convened meeting of parish and local centre wardens on 25
January 1956 discussed `some token of our esteem' to be presented to Rev
Kruger as a farewell gift. A suitably ~ inscribed `wallet of notes' was
decided upon and plans for collection of donations put in place. The
frequently occurring names of Jefferies, Seng, Pickering, Jones and
Baker were again prominent. As a footnote to this meeting, a donation of
a silver coin at each meeting to `defray expenses for the ladies for
supper' was unanimously supported -- a gesture no doubt appreciated by
the ladies who, since the formation of the parish, had provided these
refreshments through personal donations or from guild funds.\footnote{Kilkivan
  Parish Minutes p. 156, 1923-1947, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane DJ 3 Box
  3}

Following the sad circumstances of his departure from Kilkivan parish,
Rev Kruger's ministerial career continued in St Mary's Kilkoy until
1959, then on to Christ Church Childers for three years, followed by ten
years at All Saints Chermside, and finally to St Augustine's at Hamilton
from 1973 until his untimely passing in 1978 at age 55.\footnote{Diocesan
  Clergy Records, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1956--1958 : Rev Robert Albert
Donne}

Rev Robert Albert Donne began his training for ministry in Ballarat in
1928. After serving at various Locations in Victoria he spent time in
Suva as Rector, Pro Cathedral, Diocese of Suva during 1945- 1948 before
returning as vicar to Portland and Rural Dean of Hamilton, Diocese of
Ballarat from 1949 to 1956. He is listed in the 1957 Yearbook as Rector
of Kilkivan from 1956 with the address being Christ Church Rectory,
Murgon.\footnote{Clergy records} He took charge of ministry in Kilkivan
parish in mid-August 1956 after an eight-month interregnum. The first
service entry to carry his name was made on 12 August.\footnote{Parish
  of Kilkivan Service Register} He and Mrs Donne were warmly welcomed
throughout the parish with a huge collective sigh of relief at having
full-time ministry once more. An added bonus quickly became evident as
Mrs Margaret Donne frequently accompanied her husband on his rounds of
parish services where her beautiful and strong singing voice enhanced
the worship.

In the 1 October 1956 \emph{Church Chronicle's `}Kilkivan and Murgon'
article parishioners gratefully recognized the move from Portland on the
far south-west coast of Victoria was a big one for the couple to make.
The rector then continued the writings by expressing appreciation for
`the warm welcome and much help and kindness from parishioners in every
centre' and his `outstanding impressions' of the `loyalty and
faithfulness with which Church officers, Ladies' Guilds, Sunday School
Teachers and others' had continued in the interim. \footnote{1 October
  1956 \emph{Church Chronicle}} These `others' are named in the register
of services throughout the first half of the year and into August with
the bulk of these conducted by the ever- faithful, retired priest, Rev C
Tunstall. Mr S James, conducted a Good Friday (March) evensong in
Murgon.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Service Register}

After one and a half months of regular services the Venerable Harold
John Richards (Archdeacon of Wide Bay and Burnett, 1956-1970) conducted
Rev Donne's much anticipated Installation and Induction on Tuesday 25
September 1956 where 120 delighted parishioners gathered in support. Rev
Richards was supported in the eucharistic service by Rev Robert Mawson,
rector of St Peter's Gympie and rural dean of Wide Bay from 1955 and Rev
Reuben Athelstance Foote, rector of St Michael and All Angel's,
Kingaroy. A collection to support the Mission to Seamen was noted on 21
October with a congregation of 33.\footnote{1959 Diocesan Year Book} It
is around this time that the names of N A Greenbury, G C Quinn, and L
Sempf were registered in the Diocesan year book as wardens of the
parish.

Although attendance at services had remained at a reasonable, though
slightly lower level, with some centres receiving somewhat intermittent
and irregular attention for some time, parish finances had once more
taken a down-turn. The surge in congregation numbers now evident
throughout the parish brought with it a renewed desire to attend to the
current low financial position and then to formulate a better budgeting
system based on a system of pledged giving.

Throughout 1956-1957 the Murgon Ladies Guild continued to `step-up to
the plate' catering for function ranging from Film Nights, through
Football Club dinners, tractor displays, the rector's induction service
refreshment plus many weddings, not to mention the ever-present street
stalls and the efforts of individuals such as the diligent Mr and Mrs
Gedge with the sale of produce, fresh and preserved, from their
extensive gardening efforts. As a result, their efforts covered several
large expenses such as a payment of \pounds600 to the State Electricity
Commission, the installation of an electric light over the church gate,
donations to Red Cross and Church Missions, the local Church of England
Youth Club and the Sunday School, as well as financing the ongoing,
mundane needs for brooms, `Brasso', furniture polish and so on. In
addition, the parish general fund (referred to as Warden's Fund) was
augmented.\footnote{Murgon Ladies Guild cash book (1940-1966)} However,
the shadow of needed funds hung heavily over the otherwise smoothly
running parish and in spite of the gallant efforts of the guilds at all
centres and other parish groups' arranged social ventures.

January 1957 heralded in a year of enhanced efforts on many fronts and
did nothing to dampen the drive forward with efforts for a parish hall
in Murgon and a church building for Windera.

\section{Building Projects 1957}

\subsection{Parish Hall}

The `voiced' desires for a parish hall to be built in Murgon began to
take concrete form through several meetings in April where preliminary
planning ideas were discussed and a committee was appointed with
authority to arrange for plans and specifications to be drawn up. By the
end of the month these had been obtained and submitted. It was envisaged
that approval be sought and gained in time for `a start at an early
date'. Blueprints had been drawn up by the end of July, costing
information was being sought, and an imminent start to this `urgently
needed' project was envisaged.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/parishHall.png}
\caption{Christ Church Murgon and Parish Hall}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


A 25 October 1957 letter confirmed that acceptance of the plans had been
`approved and (plans) returned herewith' -- signed `Archbishop'. A
contract was let to builder, J W Goodchild, the hall `to include a
well-equipped kitchen and a kindergarten room' with plans for the
facility to be operational in early 1958.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} articles, 1957: 1 February p 59; 1 April p 122; 1 July p
  219; 1 August p 257; 1 December p 380.} Eager to proceed, in October
the parish administration team contacted the Diocesan Property office
applying for permission to negotiate a Commonwealth Bank overdraft of
\pounds2000 `upon security of a guarantee by the Diocese' to help with
financing construction and furnishing'. Total cost was estimated at
around \pounds3000. Along with the provisos that all necessary paperwork,
signed by the rector, parish wardens and Murgon sub-wardens, be
submitted and satisfactory reduction amounts be agreed with the bank,
permission was granted and subsequently `executed under Diocesan Seal on
18 December 1957.\footnote{Diocesan Council Minutes 31 October and 31
  January 1958, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane.} Construction work began
and progressed rapidly with an April dedication date in mind.

\subsection{Windera Church}

Dedicated planning again progressed at Windera early in 1957 with a
`last day of February' meeting in the then venue for church services,
the local public hall. The general design and dimensions were approved
and Mr C Noffke assigned `to arrange for scale plans and specifications
be prepared. The local guild minutes support the above, also recording a
funds balance of \pounds170, for general expenses and support of the guild
building fund. July saw the also `urgently needed' Windera project had
progressed to the `Blueprint/costing stage with building to be commenced
`as soon as Archbishop in Council approval has been received'.

Approval (and return of all plans and blueprints) was conveyed in a
letter of 25 October 1957. Great progress continued into December with
logs, kindly felled and donated by Mr C Noffke and Mr D G Baulch from
their properties, being milled locally to provide the hardwood frame.
\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} articles, 1957: 1 February p 59; 1
  April p 122; 1 July p 219; 1 August p 257; 1 December p 380.} Diocesan
permission for a bank overdraft - limit of \pounds500 - was sought for the
Windera church's bank account held in the Commonwealth Bank, Murgon.
Duly granted, \footnote{Diocesan Council Minutes 31 October and 31
  January 1958, Diocesan Archives, Brisbane.} this allowed local
builder, Mr Luke Pringle to be engaged to oversee the project assisted
by eager local community volunteers -- a `big call' for the local
dairying community whose farming commitments included morning and
afternoon `milking of the herds' and the growing of fodder for same.
Women willingly played their part as well with many and varied task
including provision of refreshments and all painting and oiling of
timbers left in their competent hands.

From the Windera Guild minutes Rev Donne did not approve of the locally
favoured `St Katharine's' and suggest several alternative `English
saints'. With the April dedication date drawing nearer Mrs Margaret
Donne, whose name appears as a regularly attending guild member,
suggested a compromise, not from either party's list. The church of The
Holy Spirit, Windera was finally so named allowing appropriate
documentation to be completed.

While building projects seemed to take centre stage in 1957, parish
business carried on regardless, as indicated by several Murgon's guild
cash book where several entries covered events such as street stalls and
varied functions catering along with expenses incurred. Mrs Donne is
mentioned several times, indicating her willing involvement. Similarly,
the services register records events ABM deputation's visit on 9 March
where a Miss Thelma Cook addressed the congregation. The blessing of the
Simnel Cake is a notation for 16 March (Lent IV) while the 25 April
entry introduces IR Sharp as a lay-reader.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan
  services register, March 1957, Diocesan Archives, DJ 3 Box 2}

Several Church Chronicle 1957 articles mention further general business
items such the Blessing of the Plough ceremony at the Murgon Show, the
fact that 20 children were baptised during the month of April, the
rector's glee that he `made some needed repairs to the rectory
(admittedly) with the help of a more experienced carpenter', with timber
generously supplied by C Noffke (Windera) and had installed a complete
set of kitchen cupboards, courtesy the parish council. The parish
council, on the recommendation of the treasurer, Colin V Lord (Boonara),
introduced a `car depreciation fund'.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} 1
  May 1957 p. 156}

1958 ushered in some major celebratory events for the two exciting
building projects. The brand-new hall hosted the Wednesday 5 March
Lenten Eucharist (conducted by the rector) and then blessed at an
intercessory service at 7.30pm that night.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan
  Services Register March 1958}

The Venerable Archdeacon Harold John Richards once again graced the
parish with his presence in the parish on Sunday (Whitsunday) 25 May
1958, which marked as `very special' day in parish history with two
major functions. Firstly, he officiated at the 7.30am eucharist then
conducted the official `Dedication of the Parish Hall' at a 10.00am
before a congregation of 125. A new era of extended activities was
heralded in with activities groups joyfully and thankfully receiving the
extra space and freedom. The spacious facility with a kitchen area and
three other separate areas allowed Sunday School classes to be conducted
more comfortably and numbers increased. The Youth Group met in the hall
as well under leadership of Mr Norm Carr, a teacher at Murgon High
School, with many and varied activities from play-reading sessions to
full blown social dances on the lovely crow's ash dance floor.

This was followed by a luncheon. At a 2.30pm service, with a
congregation of 280, the outlying centre of Windera where the equally
exciting official dedication of the Church of the Holy Spirit Church
took place. Rev Richards was officiant and preacher at each function.
The signatures of both Richards and Donne accompanied the register
entries.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Services Register May 1958}

By 1958 various methods to boost funds and encourage regular giving had
received considered and deep investigation. Adding to concerns, a new
vehicle was required, the current one having over 60,000 miles `on the
clock' needed to be replaced. Permission to apply for an overdraft of
\pounds400 was sought on 29 September. Rev Donne favoured the Wells Scheme
which had seen successfully applied in several other parishes. However,
the fee of \pounds1,400 for obtaining their services was considered too
expensive. This proved to be an insurmountable obstacle and a special
committee sought further more achievable options and finally adopted the
Anglican Promotion Scheme in 1958 and embarked on a promotional
\emph{Every Member Canvass} totally organized and conducted by locals of
the area. 4 September is marked in the register as `Stewardship Sunday'.
The decision was implemented and introduced through special promotional
Loyalty Dinners during September 1958 at Kilkivan, Goomeri and Murgon
centres, considered to be central for locations. Murgon's function on 16
September was a double celebration with Murgon-born Rev David Shand
(Nambour), son of the parish's first vicar (Rev Rupert Warner Shand,
1919-1922) as guest speaker. The 1 November \emph{Church Chronicle}
article reported that around \pounds1,200 had been pledged -- `a very
satisfactory outcome'.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} 1 Nov 1958 p 148}

During September the parish received a visit from a Church Missionary
Society's representative who gave an interesting account of CMS outreach
involvement. The following week the work of lay-readers, J Sharpe and E
Miller, in conducting a Morning Prayer (Matens) is recognized.
Similarly, on 26 October recognition was given to the GFS group through
a special Friendship Service and the dedication of their new
banner.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Services Register September/October
  1958}

Rev Donne officially offered his resignation of his licence as Rector of
the Parish of Kilkivan to Archbishop Reginald Halse, in a letter dated
28 October 1958 to take effect from 10 November -- duly signed and
notated `Accepted to take effect on the above- mentioned
date'.\footnote{Diocesan Registry files.} The final entry bearing his
signature is shown in the register on 9 November with a 7.30am eucharist
in Murgon with 38 communicants.

The Donnes returned to Victoria. Ronald Alfred Donne died in Portland
Victoria. The following entry appears in the Australian Death Index
1787-1985:

\begin{quote}
Ronald Arthur Donne

Birth: about 1898

Death -- Portland, Victoria

Registered 1963

Registration Number: 17471\footnote{Diocesan Registry files.}
\end{quote}

With no incumbent priest, services during the remainder of 1958 and into
August 1959 continued to be faithfully conducted throughout the parish.
Rev C Tunstall, who had retired to Murgon with a general licence
conducted regular Holy Communion services and lay-readers I Sharpe, E
Miller and W Atkins assisted with Matens and Evensong services. Register
notations include the Family and Prize Giving service with I Sharpe on
30 November and the 7 December showing of a Jungle Doctor film strip at
evensong.

During December the parish officials offered two possible replacement
priests, namely Rev M Paxton Hall (Childers) and Rev Frank Knight
(Palmwoods). The letter also included concern that no one was available
to conduct Christmas Holy Communion Services as Rev Chas Tunstall had
made prior plans to be away, along with willingness to accept a
Christmas 1 service in lieu. The Murgon service register indicates
Matens on Christmas Day followed by a 28 December (Christmas 1)
Eucharist with Rev J Tunstall (rector, Wondai/Proston) and the
appearance of a one-off 7.30 pm Holy Communion service conducted by Rev
M C Richter.

\section{1959 : Rev Derek Barrett}

Diocesan correspondence indicates that in an August 1959 communication
dealing mainly with details regarding Rev M Richter, a request that 'in
the meantime' the parish `would be very appreciative of the temporary
appointment of Rev Derek Barrett as Priest-in-Charge' is added. Rev
Barrett was duly appointed as a locum tenens Priest-In-Charge of the
Parish of Kilkivan in 1959 following Rev Donne's departure. The
Registrar informed the locals that `\ldots while he is (so employed) he
is to be paid a stipend'. The minimum annual stipend of \pounds850 pa is
mentioned as applicable, in addition to rent-free use of the
Rectory.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence} He signed using his full name
in the services register as resident in the position on 9 August 1959.
Records indicate he used the initials DB during uninterrupted service in
Murgon until 13 December of that year. The Murgon Guild purchased a gift
and provided supper for Rev Barrett's party and supplied `groceries for
the rectory'.\footnote{Murgon Guild Cash book, Jan 1959-60}

Former Murgon Student Hostel residents for the 1958-1960 period have
recollections of his presence at that nearby establishment and a
friendship with the Superintendent and Matron, Mr and Mrs John Else and
their daughter Enid. Clergy records indicate that he served as assistant
curate, St Paul's Maryborough, prior to his 1959 Murgon appointment and
similarly at St James Toowoomba (1959-1961), so he was reasonably
situated as to allow some occasional travel to Murgon. He spent from
1963 as a priest in the UK until his retirement in 1990, finally
returning to Queensland with spouse Gwendolene in 1997 with permission
to officiate in Brisbane Diocese.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1959--1962 : Rev Murray Clifford
Richter}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.3\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.28\textwidth,right]{images/richter.png}
\caption{Rev Richter And Family}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Archival correspondence indicates mounting, though politely phrased,
tensions within the parish regarding the prolonged period of
interregnum. Positive signs in the Parish Council minutes began
appearing in the early months of 1959. Correspondence from the Diocesan
Registry files signed by Wardens and Parochial Nominators, E Miller, L
Sempf and R Mander-Jones, confirm that negotiations towards the possible
appointment of Rev Richter (1924-2011) had begun soon after Rev Donne's
notice of relinquishing the rectorship of the parish. A letter to
Diocesan Council, dated 18 March 1959, officially nominated Rev Murray
Clifford Richter for the position of Rector of the Parish of Kilkivan
and urged the council's urgent consideration and acceptance of the
nomination, to be followed by a formal Diocesan approach to Rev Richter.
Personal reasons of `family ties and schooling for his (three) children'
were cited as underlying his desire to come to the Brisbane Diocese.

Subsequently, the 2 June correspondence referred to a visit to the
Parish by Rev Richter where he conducted all five services across the
parish, there was a strong desire for his appointment and that all `are
even more anxious for his appointment\ldots{} and now keenly await the
results of the discussions he is having with his Bishop'. It appears
Kilkivan's enthusiasm for this move was not so enthusiastically shared
as discussions between the Brisbane and Armidale Diocese indicate. A
letter from the Diocesan Registrar to Kilkivan's parish wardens, states
in part `\ldots I believe the Archbishop of Armidale does not consider
that the clergyman has sufficient experience to accept the position in
your parish...'.

Never-the-less Kilkivan area was firm in its resolve and pressed on
stating that as Rev Richter had apparently met with diocesan officials
in Brisbane, they `\ldots felt sure that having met our nominee you will
understand our strong desire to have his services in our Parish'. Their
application to have Richter appointed was formalized in minutes of 25
July 1959 on a motion by Mr Sing and seconded by GC Quinn. There
followed an August letter, again signed by Miller, Sempf and
Mander-Jones stating that they now `had ascertained' that `the Bishop of
Armidale was willing to release him (Richter) at Christmas time'. To
prevent further delay they were requesting `urgent placement of the
nomination before the Presentation Board'. They further requested the
Board support them through affirmation forwarded to the Bishop of
Armidale along with a request for Rev Richter's release as early as
possible in December to allow settling in time prior to Christmas.
Responses to each of the parish's letters were duly received.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence Files, 18 March, 02 June, 25 July, 28 August 1959)}

The Parish Council minutes of 1959 reveal that all ongoing business, as
well as the necessary preliminary arrangements for the new rector's
arrival, was attended to. This included the wind-up of short-term
rectory rental agreements, a \pounds50 donation to Rev C Tunstall in
appreciation for services to the parish and the proposal of \nicefrac{1}{2} fares for
a taxi for Mr Atkins to continue providing lay ministry to Cherbourg to
be arranged. A `Parish Canvass' to boost depleted funds to be organized.

Entries from an accompanying water-stained services register indicate
regular 2\textsuperscript{nd} and 4\textsuperscript{th}Sunday services
at alternating 11.00 am/2.00 pm time slots on a month-about basis from
27 December 1959 through to 27 January 1963. No mention is made of the
venue though on these pages, although mention of a baptism for Donald
George McAntee (14 February 1960 @ 2.00 pm) leads to the conclusion that
it is part of a similar earlier find by former Diocesan Archivist,
Glenda Murrell, and that it is from the Windera church. The McAntee
family were, over three generations, resident in Windera and church
members there for many years. Local knowledge indicates a similar
pattern 2\textsuperscript{nd} and 4\textsuperscript{th} Sunday services
was in place at St David's, Boonara with the order of times reversed.
Rev Richter continued to follow the parish custom of five services per
Sunday with variations to include 11.00 am and 7.30 pm at Goomeri and
Kilkivan and to cater for Holy Communions at Cherbourg.

For over a year (10 November 1958 - 20 December 1959) the Kilkivan
parish had been without the services of a full-time presiding priest.
Though exceedingly grateful for the combined efforts of volunteers and
the one month's locum-tenens service of Rev Derek Barrett, which had
kept the churches in all centres at least `ticking-over', the arrival of
Rev Murray Richter was greeted with joyous relief. He and family came to
Murgon from the township of Baradine situated northern inland region of
the Diocese of Armidale, northern NSW, on a stipend of \pounds975/pa plus
house and car (a late 1958 model Holden) with all motoring expenses
paid. Diocesan files record that on 16 December 1959 `\emph{The Rev
Murray Clifford Richter was this day licenced as Rector of the parish of
Kilkivan effective\ldots'} as from date of writing.\footnote{Hand-written
  Diocesan Register of Appointments, p. 34 (665)} He conducted his first
service in the parish on 20 December, 1959, one week after Rev Barrett's
departure.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence File.}

The 1 February 1960 Parish Council meeting announced that, after 24
years of paying rent to the Murgon centre, (totalling \pounds936 for the term)
responsibility for the Rectory was, finally, to be taken over by the
Parish of Kilkivan. It was noted that the property was badly in need of
attention. Urgent initial repairs were to cost \pounds308 with painting
costing \pounds211. A total of \pounds176 was still owing on the car account. Ideas
for procuring interest free loans were discussed. A letter conveying
this was forwarded by R Mander Jones to the Diocesan Registrar. By 6
April approval was received along with due consideration for repayments.




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.6\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.58\textwidth,right]{images/rectoryRepairCost1960.png}
\caption{Details of repairs}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


With the new rector's arrival, it became glaring clear that urgent
attention was required in many areas, especially `to get the parish back
on its feet'. Though clearly and appreciatively acknowledging the
efforts of the dedicated and generous efforts which had kept the parish
functioning smoothly with regular worship, it was obvious the work-loads
had had an effect on morale. At the conclusion of this first Parish
Council meeting under Rev Richter's chairmanship, where a review of the
preceding year's events and future plans were discussed, wardens Miller
and Sempf, parochial nominator R Mander-Jones and honorary
secretary/treasurer C V Lord `felt compelled to write' to the registrar
Mr St Johns offering thanks for his `assistance, approachability, and
sound, down-to-earth advice' during the period without a rector.

The new page in Murgon's history brought with it an immediate surge in
vitality and energies as evidenced in the minutes of the first Parish
Council meeting chaired by Rev Richter in February 1960, and continuing
throughout an action-packed first year. The main items dealt with
included:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Immediate attention to a new tank for the rectory and urgent repairs
  to pot-holes in the driveway.
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Proposed and much needed extensions to St Matthew's Kilkivan.
\item
  Introduction of a Parish Paper- proposed, evaluated and introduced.
  Printed as a Periodical.
\item
  Funds short-fall. All centres urged to address `assessments in
  abeyance' by 31 May 1960.
\item
  Urgent: Filing cabinet and cards for the church office; Letter Heads
  for correspondence;
\item
  A subsequent inclusion of a `moveable phone' and three extra power
  points installed.
\item
  Proposal to purchase `a full set of vestments for priests' use, to
  remain property of the parish.
\item
  Compilation of a full set of Centre Rolls and a full Parish Roll to be
  completed.
\item
  The mooted and earlier attempts at a `Parish Canvass' to be fully
  implemented in order to formalize pledges for budgeting purposes.
\item
  Ideas to assist Goomeri centre where Sunday School for 66 children was
  currently attempting to operate in a church to hold 40 people.
\item
  An approach to Diocesan authorities `to help eliminate the problem of
  parishes enduring long periods without a priest', suggesting the
  possibility of enforcing `a limit to the waiting-time'.
\end{itemize}

It is pleasing to note the appearance, alongside the now familiar
long-servers, of `new names' in the records (C V Lord, F Narracott, G
Sturgess, D McIntosh, D Kay to name just a few) who actively contributed
in many and varied roles.

A concerted effort to provide more assistance to the parish for work in
Cherbourg was brought to the notice of the general parish community by
lay reader W Atkins and Cherbourg Superintendent, Mr Sturgess who was
also a parish warden. A motion to be presented to the Diocesan Synod
requested that there be a discussion on `\ldots{}\emph{the general
conditions existing in Cherbourg in relation to Religious Instruction
and to whether a part-time curate could be employed, sharing the balance
of his time in the parish of Kilkivan'} together with a query re
Diocesan assistance being given. The rector and wardens were empowered
to further investigate `Cherbourg and Home Missions'.\footnote{Minutes 2
  Feb to 6 September 1960}

The progressive spirit was evident throughout the parish. St David's,
Boonara pushed ahead with its plans for alterations to enlarge the
church and applied of a bank overdraft limit up to \pounds700 which came into
effect in August 1960.

Rev Richter, a qualified architect `drew up the plans' for St Matthew's,
Kilkivan's extensions which were dedicated on `25 September 1960 with
the Rural Dean, Rev R D Turner, officiating'.\footnote{Kilkivan
  Centenary Book pp 15/16} However However, the cost remained to be paid
and by 30 October 1960 the application for an increased bank overdraft
for St Matthew's centre, authorised by the rector and parish wardens
Messrs Sempf, Miller and Pearson, had been approved by the Diocesan
Properties Board.

From the Diocesan end came a proposal for an alteration to the Kilkivan
parish's boundaries to allow the Manumbah Mill centre to become part of
the Nanango parish `as the Nanango rector would be more able to provide
the ministry it deserves'. Fully supported by all parties, the proposal
became fact in 1961.\footnote{Diocesan correspondence 30 December 1960
  and 4 August 1961}

\section{The New Rectory}

The condition of the rectory premises and the expense required to
complete the ever-mounting repair and maintenance requirements, along
with its distance from the church, led very quickly to suggestions of
its sale and the purchase of a more suitable dwelling for a family.
Application was made through the Diocesan Registrar for permission to
proceed along these lines as an attractive brick house in Watt Street
adjacent to the church had come onto the market. Diocesan Council
responded with `sympathetic consideration \ldots{} when they (the
parish) are in a position to submit a definite proposal' regarding
details of overdraft required `to finance the difference between the
sale of the present rectory and the purchase price'.\footnote{Minutes of
  Diocesan Finance and Property Board 17 April 1958 -- 13 July 1961.}
However, this proposed purchase did not eventuate.

The November 1960 parish minutes began on a solemn note with a minute's
silence as a mark of respect for parish member, Mr Les Eland, killed in
a tragic accident -- a fall from a hayshed roof while assisting a
neighbour and fellow Boonara parishioner with repairs. A letter of
sympathy was forward to his widow, Jean. A bell and bell tower in his
honour was later added to St David's Church. Jean Eland continued
uninterrupted service to the church until her passing at age 80 in 199??
Her bequest to Boonara centre was utilized on renovations to the front
porch and the purchase of a portable home communion case for parish use
-- both dedicated to her memory.

The mood of the meeting lifted with the news that the long-mooted desire
for a new Parish Rectory in Murgon had finally begun to take shape, with
Mr Miller outlining the outcomes of the warden's meeting. Much
discussion and sharing of wide-ranging views led to a motion move by Mr
Frank Narracott and seconded by Mr Ogg `that the wardens go into the
matter of a new rectory; that plans, costs, finance and disposal of old
rectory' be investigated. Much effort and expense had already been
expended on the old and deteriorated rectory and with further expenses
considered to be around \pounds300 just to have it considered safe as a place
of habitation while still not up to requirements, disposal and new-build
seemed sensible way forward.\footnote{Parish council minutes 28 November
  1960}

A qualified architect, Rev Richter immediately began working on the
design and plans for the rectory and offered to oversee the building
process. By mid-December these plans and scale drawings and elevations
of the new-build, adjacent to the church, had been completed. Along with
the included possible extensions to Christ Church itself plus the size
and positioning of all existing buildings the documentation had been
submitted to the Murgon Shire Council and `had met with the Shire
Engineer's approval'. This information was confirmed in recent
communications with South Burnett Regional Council's representative, (Mr
Russell Springhall. SBRC holds all documents from the former Murgon
Shire records in both original (pencil drawn) and digital form. Details
include approval date of plans as 29 December 1960 and builder, Mr Luke
Pringle of Garrick Street Murgon. Exterior walls were to be in chamfer
boards with the interior lined with Bernie/Masonite board.

A full cost of \pounds4,000 was estimated with an expected \pounds2,000 from the
sale of rectory cottage to be utilized immediately in reduction. A
qualified builder (Mr L Pringle) had volunteered to be in overall charge
of construction, with further builders, joiners, plumber and
electrician, all being congregation members and offering service at
virtually `price of goods' rates, it was thought that even allowing for
small costings margin, the estimate of \pounds4,000 remained generously above
requirements. Negotiations for a loan through the lending department of
the Commonwealth Savings Bank of Australia were in train. It was hoped
Diocesan approval would be viewed positively and processed immediately.

Following receipt of a 20 February letter from the bank (as above)
stating its agreement to the requested loan on the basis of a deposit of
the deeds and fire policies to both present and new lands and repayment
of at least \pounds100 per half year plus interest and an immediate reduction
of \pounds2,000 upon sale of present rectory. The relevant Diocesan department
expressed concurrence in these arrangements.\footnote{Diocesan Property
  and Finance Board minutes 23 Feb 1961}

As often happens, the estimated costings fell considerably short of
requirements. A 5 July letter from the Rector and Wardens to Diocesan
authorities advised of the parish's decision to accept and offer of
\pounds1750 from Mr Patrick Joseph Mulhall, Railway Department, Clifton, who
was to take possession of the property as from 22 August 1961, pending
final payment.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence} The Diocesan Property
Board expressed concurrence, and was asked to proceed with the transfer
on the parish's behalf through local solicitor, G B Roberts. The 31
August minutes contained details of transfer as requested, under
Diocesan Seal, of Allotment 15, Section 5, County Fitzroy, Parish and
Town of Murgon.\footnote{Minutes of D Property and Finance Board, July
  1961 -- 9 April 1964}

Although the sale of the old rectory and the transfer of the deeds to Mr
Mulhall brought some financial relief, overdraft increases began to
present themselves as being necessary evils. By October, the parish
treasurer, Mr Colin Lord, telephoned the Registrar stating that a
further loan was required for the erection of the rectory now seen to be
costing much more than first thought with \pounds5,900 already spent against
the original estimate of \pounds4,000 -- the lower sale price of former
rectory contribution somewhat to this. The parish expected they could
reduce this proposed extra loan of \pounds4,300 by \pounds500 per annum. However, by
11 December 1961, an additional loan of \pounds1,000 was sought `to pay
outstanding accounts in connection with the new rectory', bringing the
principal overdraft debt to \pounds3,332 with the new loan on top of that. It
was recommended that insurance on the new building be increased because
of growing costs. In spite of this, spirits remained high and optimism
prevailed, with the original concept of being debt-clear in ten years
remaining the main aim. The Property and Finance Board's 26 October
meeting `felt it necessary to give permission to pay the debts',
reluctantly agreeing to increasing the proposed loan to \pounds4,300, along
with stated concern for these ever-increasing costs and a requirement
for firm commitment to debt reduction.\footnote{Diocesan Property and
  Finance Board Minutes 27 July 1961 -- 9 April 1964}

Meanwhile, in June 1961 the Murgon centre applied, in a letter through
the Rector, for a loan of \pounds500 through the Commercial Bank of Australia
to purchase `an urgently needed new Kingsman Duchess Organ'. Permission
was granted under Diocesan Seal (27 September) for a loan of \pounds350
against the account, Murgon Church's Organ Account, subject to the usual
conditions of formal application and a satisfactory repayment schedule
duly attended to as required, with a faculty being granted `under
Diocesan Seal' dated 27 September 1961. The Ladies' Guild again stepped
up, raising a substantial amount of the purchase price plus the supply
of `Hymn books plus freight for the Organ'.\footnote{Murgon Ladies Guild
  Cash Book entries 1960-1962}

By 17 October 1962 the concerned parish treasurer, Mr Colin V Lord, was
strongly advocating a determined Parish Drive for donations to attend to
the ever-growing rectory debt.




\begin{figure}[!t]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/DonMcCleodNormaHutchenson1960.png}
\caption{Miss Norma Hutchinson \& Mr Donald McLeod}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


Throughout his time as rector the further sacraments of marriage and
baptism plus funeral duties were diligently and warmly conducted by the
rector. To illustrate, in March 1960 the \emph{South Burnett Times}
carried a report of the marriage of Miss Norma Hutchinson to Mr Donald
McLeod in Christ Church Anglican church which was described as `one of
the prettiest weddings seen at Murgon for many years' and continues to
describe the bride's entry into the foyer of church to `organist Dr Monz
playing a fanfare followed by the bridal march as she, on the arm of her
father, entered the church'. In a recent letter, Mrs McLeod, the
organist's former practice receptionist states `\emph{I will never for
forget Dr Bernard Monz. He asked if he could play the organ. Boy did I
say yes quickly. It was beautiful. Felt like we were bringing a whole
orchestra with us.'} The article continues with full details of
attendants and descriptions of the bride's and bridesmaids' gowns,
making special mention of Dr Monz's daughter, Julie, `who made a
beautiful little flower girl'.

On the back of this next photo, Mrs McLeod has written \emph{`Don and I
were given a surprise by my young Cubs. I never dreamed this would
happen. I was `Kim' to them. Noel, my youngest brother actually kept
this secret. It was a lovely feeling when I saw them here. They were a
good `pack'. Mrs Nichols must have organized it} \emph{all.'}

On 7 July 1961 Rev Richter and churchwardens R B Jeffries and Bernard A
Gedge filed a Notice of Intention to apply for a Faculty authorising
them `to place a Processional Cross in Christ Church, Murgon, in memory
of Dr Bernard Monz. The processional cross is to be used for ceremonial
purposes within the church and parish' -- duly signed and dated by the
rector and wardens who also advised that due Public Notice `has been
attached to the church door for 14 consecutive days' as required. The
Faculty was granted as requested on 11 July, 1961 and now forms part of
the worship framework in Christ Church.\footnote{.Diocesan Property and
  Finance Board minutes of 11 July etc.}

An affiliation with Mothers' Union Australia and a group was formed in
Murgon with Mrs Dorothy Richter as its first president\footnote{Information
  courtesy Shirley Waldock.}. Murgon Ladies Guild remained an active and
valued support group for all parish activities.

The Kilkivan Centenary book states that `due to his wife's ill health Mr
Richter was forced to return to the south in 1962. On 21 August 1962 Rev
Richter officially tendered his resignation from the parish, effective
19 November 1962. Official confirmation in a letter to warden, C V Lord,
was issued by the Diocesan Registrar along with the necessary forms --
duly completed by parish officials.

From Kilkivan parish Rev Richters returned south to Epping/Thomastown
1962/1969; Frankston E 1969-1971; Chaplain AMF 1970 -1974; Chaplain
Brighton GS 1974-1988. Retired 1988 with PTO Melbourne. (Clergy Records

During the interregnum local lay persons conducted services or Morning
and Evening Prayer with the occasional assistance (as shown in the
December 1962 parish services register for Boonara which also indicates
one service - `interrupted -- hail'.) of Deacon Fred Ailwood (later the
Venerable Frederick Charles Ailwood) who was active in the area,
possibly stationed at either Wondai or Kingaroy. The Christmas Eucharist
was conducted by a visiting priest on 23 December 1963. Other occasional
sacramental services were conducted by Rev James Anthony Carpenter Shaw
who was incumbent in Wondai/Proston parish 1961/1962 and whom the
Kilkivan parish\footnote{13 August 1962 correspondence} had nominated as
a possible rector to replace Richter, though this did not eventuate. His
signature appears for the last time in the services register as
officiant at the McIntosh/Stephens wedding on 9 Feb 1963.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1963--1973 : Rev Alfred John
Gerlach}

Rev Alfred John Gerlach with his wife Shirley and three young children,
Edwin, Judith and Michael, came to the parish early in March 1963.
Murgon, and indeed the entire parish of Kilkivan was blessed with the
services of a very intelligent and well-educated man who had completed
High School aged just 16, then studied industrial chemistry and
developed many and varied practical `Handyman' skills ranging from
Crystal radio set making through motor vehicle maintenance to (later on)
adding a ground-floor room to the Rectory to accommodate his father.
Those who got to know him well have reported a compassionate and
understanding `man of the people', and `a deep thinker who could
sometimes appear \emph{a little vague} as, lost in thought; he could
walk right past a parishioner in the street without a glance'.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.9\textwidth,center]{images/gerlach.png}
\caption{Rev A Gerlach And Altar Boys}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


A young Alf Gerlach joined his local Sydney church's youth group. A
passage from Ezekiel, encountered during a Bible Study session was his
call to a faith which grew and deepened through the years. Born in 1924,
Alfred John Gerlach studied for the priesthood through Moore College
from 1947, made a Deacon and then Priested in 1950. City born, he served
as Curate at Eastwood, 1950-51 and Cammeray, 1951-52, only learning to
drive a car when he received his posting as Vicar of the rural northern
NSW parish of Wyan / Rappville (1952-58). A promotion in rank led to his
appointment as Rector to Bellingen (1958-63). His move to the Parish of
Kilkivan began the `Queenslander' chapter which lasted till his passing
in November 2019.\footnote{Clergy Notes}

From a 15 March 1963 hand-written entry in Archbishop Strong's personal
register of events, `The Reverend Alfred John Gerlach was this day
licenced as Rector of the Parish of Kilkivan as from 12 March 1963.'
Services began in earnest on 17 March, the first Sunday after their
arrival. The stipend at this time was listed a \pounds1,200/pa plus rectory,
vehicle and all running expenses.

The Gerlach family came to a parish with a positive attitude and into a
bright, new, two-storied, five bedroomed Rectory, located right beside
the Murgon Church and with a large, well equipped hall to the rear.
Buildings in all other centres were in first class order. All services
were well attended and numbers attending continued to increase under Rev
Gerlach's ministry. A regular monthly pattern of services throughout the
parish was developed with up to six services in a day, five of which
were conducted by the rector, for at least the second and fourth Sundays
each month, along with additional mid-week offices. Groups such as
Guilds, Mothers Union, Sunday Schools, GFS, Boys Brigade and Youth
Groups were evident in most centres.

The 1963 Year Book records weekly communicants at 185 with 82 baptisms
and 9 marriages for the year, along with 17 Sunday School teachers
across the centres instructing 219 enrolled children. 16 schools were
visited and 4 regular Religious Instructions teachers were actively
involved. During his `settling-in' period the support of wardens, Sempf
and Lord plus the Kapernicks and Mr Gedge in particular was much valued.
The Gerlach children were readily accepted into all community activities
and many enduring family friendships were cemented. Rev Gerlach, a tall
man, quickly became well-known for his long strides to the organ whilst
still singing loudly if no organist was available at a service.

As related by son Michael, the family arrived in Murgon a couple of days
before the scheduled arrival of the furniture removalist, and apparently
walked in on a Ladies Guild Meeting in the church hall - much to the
surprise and consternation of all, a story which Rev Alf delighted in
relating in later years. Marion Kapernick was quick to offer
hospitality, beginning a long and enduring friendships between the two
families. Marion and husband Ivor (Mick) were reliable and consistent
parish supporters until the Kapernicks' passing in 2018.

The mood was enthusiastic and positive; but behind the scenes, and of
great concern to the parish administration personnel, was the looming
figure of ever-increasing debt. As reported in a 26 September 1963
Diocesan Council minute, the parish secretary, C V Lord, under direction
from the parish council, had requested Diocesan permission to move the
Rectory Loan Account from the Commonwealth Savings Bank, Brisbane to the
local National Australia Bank (NAB) `so as to receive a set-off from
parish accounts.' Permission to proceed was granted along with the
requirement to `arrange an overdraft limit sufficient to cover' the
\pounds519.5.11 repayments arrears to Brisbane Account as well. This required
a reduction of \pounds215 each half year at an interest rate of 5 \nicefrac{1}{2}
\%.\footnote{Diocesan Property and Finance Board minutes 26 September
  1963}

\section{First Parish Assistant
Appointed}

As parish congregation numbers continued their rise, a need for `more
complete pastoral care' and some relief for the rector's ever-growing
work-load, was addressed in a parish council meeting where a brave
decision was taken to employ an assistant.\footnote{Minutes of Parish of
  Kilkivan 6 November 1963}The problem of financing an assistant was
somewhat mitigated by funding from the Diocese. Several letters are
contained in Diocesan files referring to funding grants on the basis of
perceived income gained from having a parish assistant. Miss Dorothy
Ursula Evelyn Toon was appointed and was warmly welcomed to the parish
and has taken up duties as Parish Sister.' She came to the parish from
Coorparoo `after having completed two years training in Deaconess house,
Sydney' where she received her diploma on 2 February 1964.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} -- March 1964}

Youth Group activities were extended throughout the parish, reflecting
Rev Gerlach's focus through his own call to faith. Additional Secondary
School involvement in Murgon, Goomeri and Kilkivan increased by 50\% and
no doubt contributed to growing Youth Group participation as did the
more regular visiting in the outlying centres. Extra Sunday School
classes needed to be introduced resulting in turn in outings such a
picnics and even fancy-dress balls becoming features of the younger
members' social calendars. The number of teachers and youth leaders grew
in all centres to accommodate these growing attendances.

Sr Ursula's work put her in contact with Mothers Union in Cherbourg with
the result that some of their members joined Murgon for a bus trip to
Halse Lodge for a Rural MU Conference.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle}
  - 1964} Over 30 people attended a Youth Camp held on 23-26 April (cost
\pounds3.10.0/each) conducted by Rev J Roper with all keen for a repeat.

Notice of plans for the rite of Confirmation to be administered on 16
September were issued with a call for intending candidates to register
promptly for post-Easter classes and the Church of England Men's Society
(CEMS) sponsored visit by `Jungle Doctor, Dr Paul White, who will preach
at 10.00am then address a men's luncheon gathering before flying to
Toowoomba.'\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} - 1 March 1964}

The 7 February 1964 passing of Mrs Sing, a devoted member and `long-time
President of the Murgon Guild who had been instrumental in guiding the
Guild's lucrative fund-raising efforts towards the erection of the
parish hall'.\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} - 1 March 1964}

Archbishop Strong's first visit to the parish in September began with 33
well tutored candidates being administered the Rite of Confirmation in
Christ Church Murgon. He later visited and inspected `Cherbourg
Aboriginal Settlement, one of the largest of its kind in the
Commonwealth and the only one in the Diocese of Brisbane.' His Grace
conducted Evensong in the Church of the Holy Spirit and `met personally
with congregation members after the service.'

The focus on extending Missions assistance continued with the 4 to 11
October 1964 Church Army Mission to Cherbourg by Captains Alan and
Norman Polgen, where it was reported that many adults and children were
brought into a deeper relationship with Christ. A special parishioners'
gathering in Goomeri heard `much detail about the desirability to
reinforce this ground-work through more effort being expend in the
Cherbourg area' which had a population of 1200 with 700 being children.
There were 11 teachers in the State School to cater for approximately
400 students over all seven year-level classes.

Lay involvement in services to include assisting in Rector presided
sacraments and conducting Morning Prayer and Evensong services was
encouraged. On 26 October, 1964, Albert Chisholm Mayne (Bank Officer,
Murgon), Trevor Cichero (Pharmacist, Goomeri) were officially appointed
as Lay Readers as was Mr Bernard (Bill) Ashmede Gedge on 1
November.\footnote{Correspondence File 1964}

Enthusiastic Lay personnel of the parish organized and conducted another
Stewardship Campaign (with a Counselling element) which was well
received and resulted in a substantial rise in parish income.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} 1 November 1964 p 28}

\section{The Second Parish Assistant
Appointed}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.4\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.38\textwidth,right]{images/DMcDougall.jpg}
\caption{Rev David McDougall}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


By 1965 the parish's Golden Years had truly arrived. A second Parish
Assistant was considered a necessity to keep pace with growth in church
attendance and youth involvement. In August 1965 a young and newly
married 28-year-old `Catechist and Lay Reader', Mr David McDougall, was
considered and approached to fill the void. He was admitted as Lay
Reader in the Parish of Kilkivan on 19 July 1965 and made a Deacon in
Bishopbourne on 28 August that year as noted in the Memoranda column of
the parish services register.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.8\textwidth,center]{images/davidMcDougall.png}
\caption{David McDougall Lay Reader's Testimonial}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


By November 1965 the purchase of a Curate's House, 34 Taylor Street,
Murgon, was in progress with G Roberts (solicitor) acting for both
vendor and parish `at a considerably reduced cost'. Proposals were made
to convert the property from Perpetual Lease to Freehold over a 20-year,
interest-free term following finalization of purchase.\footnote{Correspondence
  File - August and November 1965}. Rev Gerlach reported in the February
1966 \emph{Church Chronicle} that the house had been purchased (at an
economical cost of \pounds1500 secured by a mortgage), and renovations by
volunteer labour, enthusiastically led by the competent Rector, allowed
for insurance cover of \pounds2000 -- an immediate increase in value. David
and Anne McDougall moved into their new home just before Christmas.

\section{A Rector and Two
Assistants}

From July to December 1965, with two assistants working in-team with the
rector, the parish took great steps forward. The November 1965
\emph{Church Chronicle} proudly carried all three names.

Canon G A Pearson led a `Mission to Murgon' (a teaching mission) that
proved very profitable spiritually and in the practice aspects. Bishop
Hudson visited and conducted the Rite of Confirmation.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} November 1965}

In November 1965 Rev McDougal, with Diocesan grants support, undertook
his `mission to the people of Cherbourg'. Rev Gerlach described this as
`the most progressive step in the Diocese for many years.' and noted
that `Already the response has been considerable'. \footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} November 1965}

Other parish events included the Annual Spring Garden Fete and Mannequin
Parade in Murgon (opened by the Venerable H J Richards), Goomeri's
Successful Baby Show and Kilkivan's Annual Children's Fancy Dress Ball
-- all hosted by local Guilds.

At this time, it was announced that Sr Ursula would `shortly be leaving
to take up a similar position in Gympie'. \footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} November 1965} Her departure was regretful and in part due
to financial constraints in that Rev McDougall would now be supported
`largely by the parish and parishioners, income will need to increase if
a Parish Sister were to be retained as well.'.

Some Diocesan Grant monies continued in view of Rev McDougall's
involvement in Cherbourg. With more regular services being conducted and
attendances increasing with every `ringing of the bell', enthusiasm
grew. A study group was organized with encouraging results. Volunteers
began maintenance on, and painting of, the church building. Patrick
(Paddy) Alberts became the self-appointed gardener and kept the grounds
in immaculate order.

Of incidental interest was the August 1965 sale for \pounds5 of the original
site of St David's Church, Boonara, almost 30 years after its removal to
its present site, to Mr C Lord whose property fully encircled the tiny
plot.\footnote{Diocesan correspondence}

\section{From Three to Two}

Sister Ursula Toon was farewelled on 5 December 1966 following Evensong
in Christ Church, Murgon. Her `invaluable work in schools, GFS, Sunday
Schools and Fellowships over the previous two years becoming almost a
full-time Youth Worker' was greatly appreciated.\footnote{\emph{Church
  Chronicle} 1 February1966}

Rev McDougall carried forward the good work she had begun in the Schools
and Fellowship areas while Lay helpers were enlisted for some other
activities, thus allowing him time to continue to care for the residents
of Cherbourg. He was a very popular young priest, and talented musician,
who was active throughout the parish with an affinity for the outer
reaches.

Capacity congregations in Murgon and Boonara were enthralled by Bush
Church Aid Society's Rev John Wyn's description of working in vast,
remote areas and the work of the Church's flying medical work in his
Australian parish covering the 1000 miles of the Transcontinental
Railway. A visit by Rev N Langford-Smith, Bishop of Nakuru, Kenya was
planned for 5 March with 6 March 1966 Holy Communion followed by a Men's
Breakfast in the Parish Hall. \footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} 1
  February1966}

The Easter Parish Meeting was set for 1 April in Goomeri to be followed
by a `basket lunch'\footnote{\emph{Church Chronicle} 1 February1966}

Of historical significance, the services register of 22 May, 1966
records the funeral service of Rhys (Bill) Mander-Jones, the last member
of the Jones family dynasty to serve the parish in active participation.
He followed the tradition set by his predecessors David Mander and son
Llewellyn Mander Jones of Boonara and George Hall and David Lacey Jones
of Kilkivan -- all descendants to the level of great-grandsons, of the
original David Jones, Sydney, the 1838 founder of the famous David Jones
stores. An account of early Jones participation is contained in the
Boonara Centenary Book (Diocesan Archives) and a large, framed, relevant
section of the Jones family tree held in St David's church, Boonara. The
late Mr R M Jones's Will left a sum a \pounds1,000 in trust with the Brisbane
Diocese `\ldots to apply the income (the interest accrued) in
maintaining St David's church of England, Boonara\ldots' When probate
was finally granted, \$2,000 was applied (with accrued interest of
\$373.33) as requested and monies have been accessed as directed to this
day.

While 1966 was a remarkably vibrant year in parish life, the most
exciting event for Rev McDougall would have to have been his Ordination
to the Priesthood on 21 December -- a wonderful `Christmas Present' to
him and to the Kilkivan Parish with two fully ordained priests there.
The number of Sacramental services increased greatly with up to seven
Sunday services being conducted and the use of the duplex envelopes
resulted in a pleasing increase in Missions giving. On 6 August 1967, a
typical Sunday, Rev McDougall covered Holy Communion at 7.30am, Murgon;
9.00am, Cherbourg and 11.00am, Windera whilst Rev Gerlach went further
afield for H.C at 7.30am, Goomeri; 9.30am, Kilkivan including a Baptism
(Batts); 11.00am, Boonara with a Baptism (McIntosh) and finally back to
Murgon for 7.30pm. The same page in the services register indicated two
further baptisms, two funerals and one marriage (Lindsay Quinn/Cathy
Burgess).




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.7\textwidth,center]{images/serviceRegisterAug1967.jpg}
\caption{Service Register August 1967}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


During this `time of two' parish activities proliferated. Five new
members were admitted to the Mothers' Union group bringing the total
active membership to over 40 ladies. Boonara church liquidated its
overdraft, proceeded with repainting the building, and began a Bible
Study group. Windera completed paying for its church which was dedicated
in 1958. There were `plans' to extend the Parish's Hall due to heavy
overcrowding in the Kindergarten section. Murgon Guild held a Garden
Fete with the objective to raise funds for this venture. Parish coffers
were frequently augmented from Guild funds raised through, for example,
Street Stalls and Debutante Balls.

\begin{quote}
Although offerings income increased, with two salaried priests to
support along with two houses and two cars to maintain, increases in
cost-of-living items such as electricity, telephone and transport being
added to the existing financial situation, it was evident that every
blessing carried heavy responsibilities. By June 1967 budgeting issues
resulted in a request to Diocesan authorities to allow a parish
overdraft increase from \$4,730 to \$6,100 (as below) on the security of
the existing guarantee

Present debt \$4,730

Balance on Cost of New Car \$577

Working account O/d repayments \$6,88

Margin for working expenses \$125

\textbf{TOTAL \$6,100}
\end{quote}

As signed by Rev Gerlach and Parish Wardens C V Lord and L Sempf,
repayments were to be \$630 half-yearly for 18 months then at \$430
half-yearly, in addition to interest charges.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence Files}

However, even though some extra funding assistance was granted through
the Diocese, this was largely taken up by salary increases and by 1968,
`as usual in the history of the church' so often evident in this rural
parish, reliant on the vagaries of weather for income, funds were once
again at a critically low level and regretfully, Rev McDougall's
services had to be let go. The unfortunate consequence of this was that
some of the valued initiatives which had been implemented had to be
pruned back while others were fully discontinued. These included some
religious instruction classes in schools and, in one case, the Sunday
School was discontinued.\footnote{Kilkivan Centenary Book p 18}

\section{Back to `One'}

With Rev Gerlach at the helm the run of Holy Communion services in the
parish returned to the pre-assistants-pattern as indicated in this
excerpt from a copy of the Parish News. Along with this busy schedule of
Sunday services, week-day offices of Morning and Evening prayer were
offered daily in Murgon.

Death is a part of life and so funerals also feature prominently in any
Rector's diary. Two in 1970 which deserve mention are those of early
1900s settlers, Frederick W McIntosh of Tansey, buried on 1 June at
Boonara after a 60-year connection with the church, and the untimely
sudden death of long-serving parish member, Leonard Sempf (Kilkivan)
which was greeted with shock and great sadness by the entire parish. He
had served as centre warden at Cinnabar in the early years then later as
peoples' warden for Kilkivan centre and as rector's warden for the
parish, many years a parish councillor, plus duty as synod
representative. The later granting of a Faculty by His Grace the
Archbishop, Felix Arnott, allowed Mr Sempf's memory to be honoured by
the installation in St Matthew's, Kilkivan, of a Silky Oak Pulpit made
from timber cut from his Cinnabar property -- a gift from his wife, Lil.

With many family units attending services, there were many baptism and
weddings as well -- sometimes almost too many on one day as of 20
December 1969.

The service register shows three weddings in one day:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  11am, Reginald Smith/Janelle Maudsley - Kilkivan
\item
  Noon, Richard Row/Margaret Roach -- Kilkivan
\item
  4pm, Riley/Weasel - Murgon
\end{itemize}




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.4\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.38\textwidth,right]{images/weddings19691220.png}
\caption{Weddings 20 December 1969}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


In 1968 David McKie (an Accountant in Murgon) agreed to take the helm as
Secretary Treasurer of the parish and moved to address some of more
legal requirements of the Diocese such as a `Local Constitution' for
each centre and issues concerning consecutive non-attendance at Parish
Council meetings `without leave of absence' and thus being `deemed to
have vacated his office'. In August 1968. a bank account, separate from
the general Working Account named Christ Church Murgon Building Fund was
opened, spurred by a bequest of \$500 from loyal parishioners, Mr and
Mrs Tate through Mr Frank Narracott, for `the express purpose of'
extending or building a new church in Murgon. A request for recognition
in some way on new work was an added requirement. A Diocesan held Tate
Bequest still stands.

During the latter part of 1968 Mr Norman Steel Thornton, employed by the
Public Service Department as Deputy Manager at Cherbourg was appointed
as a Lay Reader.

The 50\textsuperscript{th} anniversary of Christ Church's April
dedication in 1920 was celebrated over two weekends. On 12 April 1970
the church hosted a Murgon Jubilee Marriage Reunion service followed one
week later with Golden Jubilee Eucharists at 7.30am and 9.00am with
Archbishop Philip N W Strong officiating and preaching. Refreshments in
the hall followed. A special Golden Jubilee Appeal for Missions was held
over the month of April.

During November 1970 Ross Desmond Waters and Ivor Douglas Kapernick of
Murgon were licenced to `conduct Divine Services in the Parish of
Kilkivan. In 1972, Trevor Cichero, who over the past nine years had held
positions of Lay Reader, Sub-warden, Sunday School Superintendent and
Parish Treasurer at some stage, sold his Pharmacy business and left
parish to further his calling to the Priesthood.

Rev Gerlach's interest in youth work underpinned an energetic Lay focus
in that area. Murgon resident, Ross Waldock, reminisces:

\begin{quote}
\emph{I became a member of Church of England Boys Society (CEBS). Great
times. We camped at Kinbombi Falls with Mr Doug Kay and Mr Stuart James.
Mr James told great stories of his time in the Northern Territory. I
wore the backside out of my shorts sliding down to the water hole at the
bottom of the falls.}

\emph{My sister Karen became a member of Girls Friendly Society (GFS)
along with Roslyn Dennien and Lyndall McAntee. The CEBS and GFS had
social dances in the new hall.}

\emph{We also combined with Goomeri, Murgon, Windera and Cloyna for a
trip to Halse Lodge at Noosa Heads in Noel Petersen's new bus.}

\emph{Rev Alf Gerlach took us out to the Forrestry at Gallangowan and
Jimna -- up the Fire Towers!!! -- then on to the Bunya Mountains to the
new TV stations. Fantastic trip in Rev Gerlach's Peugeot 403
(:\ldots the only car to have\ldots').}

\emph{I (Ross) became a Server for Rev Gerlach. Other Servers were my
cousin Graham Mickan, Alan and Geoff Moreton, Darryl Trapp, Neil Mayne,
Neil Trapp and I think the Milton Boys.}

\emph{Confirmation was a big event and filled the church.}
\end{quote}

During their time in Bellingen (1958-`63), Mrs Shirley Gerlach, a nurse
by profession, became seriously ill with Hepatitis to a critically
near-death point. Her recovery was considered by all as a miracle of
prayers answered by God. Rev Gerlach stated openly that during this time
he was plagued by a short period of doubts, but through Shirley's
`miracle` his restored faith was firmly cemented and deepened to levels
he had been unaware was ever possible along with an unshakable belief in
the healing power of God through prayer. He supported and encouraged
involvement in the church's `Order of St Luke'. A small group was
introduced in Murgon following visits by Mr and Mrs Alex Learmont
(Vancouver) in connection with the Ministry of Healing sponsored by the
local chapter of Order of St Luke with a Healing service held
periodically on a week night.

Hardships encountered in his early `between the wars' life meant Rev
Gerlach was well equipped to counsel with empathy, those in need or
trouble. He was also a warm and encouraging supporter of anyone who
needed guidance in their faith journey. Dr Ruth S Kerr (née Fraser),
historian, long-

time public servant in research and native title and now Adjunct
Professor in History, School of History and Philosophical Inquiry, The
University of Queensland, St Lucia, wrote of her personal appreciation
for this support while a young teacher and Christian in Murgon in 1969.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Rev Gerlach delivered stimulating and thought-provoking sermons
based on the bible readings for the day. He and wife, Shirley, played a
very influential role in my faith development.''} \footnote{Dr Kerr's
  personal correspondence.}
\end{quote}

The financial position in the parish caused the Gerlachs concern to the
point where Mrs Shirley Gerlach, while always giving her husband
unconditional support in his varied roles, added a financial facet by
returning to her nursing career at the Goomeri hospital. When this
facility closed its doors around 1968, she moved on to the hospital in
Cherbourg. While this deviation from the traditional `Minister's Wife'
role, so clearly illustrated in former years by such as Mrs Ernie Smith
and Mrs Donne, initially raised a few quizzical eyebrows, her nursing
prowess soon overcame that. Her reputation as Matron at the Cherbourg
hospital and later on in the Sunshine Coast region until retirement to
Toowoomba remains legend.

As life has it, all good things come to an end. Archbishop Arnott's hand
written diary

entry for 6 February 1973 records `The resignation of the Reverend
Alfred John Gerlach Th L as Rector of the Parish of Kilkivan has been
accepted to take effect as from 17 February 1973'.




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.95\textwidth,center]{images/gerlachResignation1973.png}
\caption{Archbishop Arnott's diary note}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


He and Shirley moved to Palmwoods (1973-1981) and Maroochydore
(1981-1990) and was appointed Rural Dean -- Sunshine Coast (1987-1990).
After `retiring' in 1990 he worked as an Honorary Assistant in Maleny
parish until relocating to Toowoomba in 2002-2012, continuing with
Permission to Officiate in St Luke's.

\section{Gone but not Forgotten}

`Gone but not Forgotten' could have voiced by both the Gerlach family
and the Parish of Kilkivan. Alf and Shirley returned for several
milestone events in Parish life, the last major one being the 2014 St
David's, Boonara, Centenary where Rev Gerlach proudly accepted
Archbishop Aspinall's invitation to present the Gospel reading and to
assist in administering the Eucharistic Sacrament. He later spoke warmly
of his memories of being Rector in the parish.

In what some may consider a sad, but rather beautiful twist of fate, two
funerals took place -- one In Murgon and one in Toowoomba -- of two
couples whose kinship in Christ spanned almost 60 years.

On 17 December 2018, a large gathering (including members of the Gerlach
family) in Christ Church, Murgon celebrated the lives of their Christian
brother and sister, Ivor (Mick) and Marion Kapernick, who were then
buried together in a single grave after having passed into eternal life
just four days apart.

Eleven months later, on 14 November 2019, at St Anne's Church,
Highfields, Alfred and Shirley Gerlach were also celebrated and
farewelled from this life, having also journeyed in to eternal realms a
week apart and now are at rest, side by side. Many church dignitaries,
including the Bishop of the Western Region, Right Reverend Cameron
Venables, were present along with a large gathering of friends and
family (including Kapernicks). The most moving aspect of this gathering
was the very large contingent of friends from or with past connections
to Cherbourg, to honour a Minister they loved and trusted and knew had
their welfare firmly in his focus, and his wife, their `Matron Gerlach'
whose revered memory will be forever in their hearts.

If ever we need a true example of God's purpose for marriage -- the
uniting of two persons, husband and wife, into `one flesh', we have it
in duplicate here. United in life, united in death, united in the Hope
of the life to come. Truly Beautiful.

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1973--1979 : Rev Donald Keith
Campbell}

I am deeply indebted to the Archdeacon Emeritus, and very good friend,
Donald Campbell, for his personal contributions which, when directly
quoted, appear in \emph{italics.} (Marcia McIntosh)

Once again, the parish was without a resident priest. From 17 February
1973 onwards, the parish register of 3 March 1973 indicates the faithful
Bill Gedge's regular pattern of a 7.00am Morning Prayer service in
Cherbourg, then on to 9.30am Goomeri, 11.00am Kilkivan and ending with
7.30pm Evensong in Murgon. He was given some reprieve when Archdeacon L
W Grayson presented three services on Holy Communion (Murgon, Goomeri
and Kilkivan) on 25 March. The same pattern was repeated on 22 April
(Easter Day), also with Holy Communion, thanks to Rev J G
Harrison.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Service Register February to April
  1973}




\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=.7\textwidth,center]{images/DonCambellAndFamily.jpg}
\caption{Rev Don Campbell and family}
\end{center}
\end{figure}


The funeral service for Mrs Kate Stephens (incorrect spelling of
`Stevens' in register), one of the pioneers of the Kitoba area between
Cloyna and Windera, conducted by the Rev W G Hayston on 3 April is
noted. \footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Service Register February to April
  1973}

During this time letters and phone calls were being exchanged between
the Diocese and parish's wardens and nominators, conferring over a list
of ministers considered as possible candidates to fill the vacancy. On 7
March the parish representatives were advised that, for various reasons,
Rev G O Thomas had decided he could not accept their offer of the
position of Rector. A further nomination was requested. After several
unsuccessful nominations by the Kilkivan Parish, on 12 March 1973,
Parochial Nominators I Kapernick, C Lord and K Batts wrote: `After
careful consideration, we would be very happy to have the name of Rev
Donald Campbell put before the Presentation Board as a new Rector for
our parish.'

Archbishop Arnott's letter of 2 April 1973, carried the glad tidings of
Rev Campbell's acceptance desire `to take up residence in June following
the birth of their third child expected in May\ldots' He continued,
offering to investigate the possibility of Rev Jack Harrison being
available `to take services over Easter' and his willingness `to act as
Locum Tenens until the Campbell family arrived'. Archbishop Arnott was
also very keen to visit and officiate at Rev Campbell's induction
service -- `possibly after Synod'.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence
  Files}

The Diocesan Year Book lists him as `Donald Keith Campbell, B.Sc (Uni of
Qld) 64, ThL (ACT) 68: Dip. R.E (MCD), Th Schol (ACT) 1972. He was
ordained a Deacon in 1968 and Priest in 1969, served as Assistant Curate
at St Stephen's, Coorparoo (1968-1970) and then at All Saints, Booval
(1970-1973).\footnote{Diocesan Clergy Records P 24} Engaging this young,
enthusiastic priest, with wife Lurline and three small children (Simon,
Paul and baby Ruth, just a week old) was considered to be a positive
step for the parish to take, in order to move forward with youth work
and community involvement in church activities. Many changes and new
initiatives began to be introduced -- not the least of these being the
singing of choruses accompanied by the Reverend on his guitar.

The new rector had a connection with the parish as his father, Mr Alex
Campbell, had been the Head Teacher at Kilkivan school in the late
1950s. This stood him in good stead with the Kilkivan congregation who
gladly accepted him as a `local'. He soon learned that travelling
through the parish often involved uninvited encounters with local
wild-life. `Roo Bars' and spotlights were noted as frequent features on
the locals' vehicles -- saving enormous damage bills but not at all
advantageous to the poor `Roos.

\section{First Service and
Induction}

Rev Donald Keith Campbell conducted his first service in the capacity of
Rector of a parish on 3 June 1973 at 7.00am in Cherbourg, followed by
9.00am, Goomeri; 11.00am Kilkivan, concluding with 7.30pm in Murgon -- a
busy day, meeting many parishioners , none of whom ever word name
badges. His Induction followed on 28 June in Murgon. \footnote{Rev
  Campbell's correspondence}

Supported by a solid team (Wardens D Kay and I D Kapernick; Lay Readers,
B Gedge and I Kapernick; Synod representatives, E A Williamson and L
Sakrzewski), work began immediately and progressed through 1973 on a
steady basis.

\begin{quote}
`\emph{On arrival in Murgon I discovered that as well as taking services
at six centres I had also inherited 19 Religious Education classes at
the primary schools at Murgon, Cherbourg, Goomeri and Kilkivan as well
as at the High School at Murgon. Over the next few years with the
Ministers' Fraternal we moved to an ecumenical approach and had the
Ministers and Lay volunteers take normal classes spread over the week
and not just denominational groups. I succeeded so well that just before
we left Murgon, I was only taking one class which was a class that no
one else would take on as they were `too tough'.'}
\end{quote}

Innovative as ever, Rev Don, as he became known to the students, decided
to break the lesson into different short spots as well as using visual
aids for the main lesson. One was a `Ha Ha' spot (jokes at which they
groaned but wanted them to continue); others were `Did you know?', `Dear
Donald Dix' and `The Serial'. Books were read in serial form, always
managing to stop at a crucial point, leaving the students waiting for
`next week's instalment'.

The regular Services roster (as indicated in the section on Rev Gerlach)
which had stood for many years was followed. However, they were not all
at consistent times each week, plus Murgon, the chief centre, was only
being offered a Holy Communion service twice monthly.

\begin{quote}
\emph{`\ldots when Bill Gedge came to Christ Church Murgon for a 7.30am
service on the Sunday it was scheduled for 7.30pm, it seemed we had to
re-think the whole matter of times of services. Associated with this was
the fact that Boonara and Windera had one 11.00am Sunday service a month
and a 2.00pm Sunday service. The afternoon services were nearly
impossible in high summer.'}\footnote{Rev Campbell's correspondence}
\end{quote}

Rev Campbell is quoted as saying: `\ldots as summer progressed the
sleepier we all became \ldots{} it was bad enough when the congregation
went to sleep but when the preacher also `dropped off', things had to
change.'\footnote{Boonara Centenary Booklet, p.30} A new, more regular
schedule offering more Holy Communion options was trialled. \footnote{Rev
  Campbell's correspondence}

A rather faded Fordigraph (Gestetna)-printed issue of the parish's
magazine, \emph{Telling All People}, set out the new service proposals
allowing Holy Communion to be offered in five centres every Sunday
except for the occasional 5\textsuperscript{th} Sunday services where
only three services were scheduled.

Every Sunday Murgon was offered a 7.15am Eucharist using the traditional
Prayer Book form of service. A new \emph{Australia 1973} Prayer Book
(The Green Book), had been successfully trialled in the parish. The
9.15am service adopted this modern form and was more family oriented.

A 5.30pm option for Cherbourg was also introduced but changed later to
6.00pm on all Sundays; Goomeri: 1\textsuperscript{ST} Sunday @ 7.30pm
and 4h Sunday @ 11.00am; Kilkivan: 1\textsuperscript{ST} and
4\textsuperscript{th} Sundays @ 11.00am; Boonara: 2\textsuperscript{nd}
Sunday @ 11.00am and 4\textsuperscript{th} Monday (later changed to
Tuesday) @ 7.30pm.\footnote{St David's Boonara Services Register 1923 --
  1993}; and Windera: 2\textsuperscript{nd} Monday and
4\textsuperscript{th} Sunday, both @ 7.30pm, with a more informal
Communion Service. \footnote{St David's Boonara Services Register 1923
  -- 1993}

\begin{quote}
\emph{`The intense discussions we had in the vestry afterwards at both
Boonara and Windera over supper were a highlight. The topics ranged from
politics to prices of wheat, pigs and beef to ethical issues and deep
theological questions. They were great times.'}
\end{quote}

Such was the interest throughout the parish that there was only one
problem with filling Parish Council positions -- the many nominations
and the necessity for a voting process! The AGMs were traditionally held
in Goomeri's Church of the Epiphany, following a service of HC. However
about two years into his incumbency, the overwhelming congregational
interest was so great that tradition was broken and the AGM was
transferred to Goomeri's Show Pavilion to take a more relaxed, picnic
form of luncheon. While the serious, adult meeting-business was in
progress, a number of `brave' volunteers oversaw games and activities
for the children in the spacious grounds.

On 21 February 1974 Lloyd Sakrzewski was admitted to the Office of
Reader in the Parish of Kilkivan and Bernard Ashmead Gedge's licence
approved for renewal. Later in the year John William Stanton also became
a licenced Lay Reader, thus allowing for more Morning or Evening Prayer
services to be added to the schedule. The rector produced notes for the
lay readers. While the Duplex Envelope option for offerings, first
introduced by Rev Donne in 1958, was available and encouraged not all
parishioners adopted its usage. Notes in the register list both
offerings as `Envelopes' and either `Open Plate' or ``Loose Change'. The
`missions' side of the envelope received some attention resulting in an
increase in the parish's missions' contributions.




\begin{wrapfigure}{R}{.4\textwidth}
\begin{center}
\includegraphics[width=0.38\textwidth,right]{images/duplexOfferingEnvelope.jpg}
\caption{Duplex Offering Envelope}
\end{center}
\end{wrapfigure}


Guild activities proliferated, funds from street stalls and catering for
functions were often boosted through the efforts of Bill and May Gedge
in their vegetable garden in Gore Street and the sale or use of its
bounty\emph{.}

\begin{quote}
\emph{`When we arrived in 1973 Bill was a widower. From the Church of
England Vegetable account Bill Gedge was able to provide the funds to
buy the new technical device -- a Fordigraph duplicator -- so now the
weekly notice sheet could be in colour. His efforts also funded an
overhead projector. While it was cumbersome it allowed the use of visual
aids in the services. Several times a year Rev Don brought bookstalls
from the CMS Bookshop to all the centres.'}
\end{quote}

On 16 May 1975 permission was granted for the use of the \emph{Australia
1973 Prayer Book} for a further 12 months. An application to install a
Conn Electronic Organ in Murgon, signed by Rector and wardens Kay and
Kapernick, and forwarded to the Diocese on 30 May 1975 was approved and
a Faculty granted by Archbishop Arnott, dated 10 July 1975.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence Files May 1975} Under the magic fingers of (mostly)
Gwen Kay and Marjorie Surawski, the notes from this lovely instrument
boosted the beauty of Murgon services.

Goals and Aims for 1976 and beyond were all aimed at continuing the
growing momentum seen throughout 1975 and 1976 .

The ambitious list for the three-to-six-months periods included;
starting Confirmation classes by 31 May. The introduction of a
September, after-school `G-Kids' series in Goomeri and one in November
in Kilkivan.

Neighbourhood Interest in Bible Studies (N.I.B.S) groups in each of the
six centres was fore-shadowed.

Plans were in hand for a Family Camp and setting up displays (bookstall,
posters, puppets, singing groups etc) at the Murgon, Goomeri, Tansey and
Kilkivan Shows and Camp-draft events in 1977\emph{.}

\begin{quote}
\emph{`There was also an outreach activity in the main street of Murgon
one Saturday morning, on the back of a truck. At one stage we had a
large group of children really enjoying the singing and action songs. A
group of adults then appeared and ushered them away. It seems that there
was a regional gathering of Jehovah's Witnesses in the Murgon hall that
weekend and our effort was not appreciated by the adults.'}
\end{quote}

In the Winter, 1976 TAP parish magazine, the three-year goal was headed
`\textbf{CANCELLED!'.}

While it had been the goal to have a parish assistant (curate or parish
sister) in three years, `after debate this idea was rejected by the
meeting as a 3-year goal, and was instead adopted as \emph{a
\underline{6}}\underline{-\emph{month goal'}}.

Though the magazine's name was later changed to \emph{Shalom,} the wide
and varied topics were of great value and fostered a whole-of-parish
connection and brought insights into the church activities beyond local
horizons.\footnote{Parish Magazine \emph{Telling All People} (TAP)
  Winter, 1976, Volume 2, Number 1}

Rev Campbell organized and led an empowering preparation course at a
Bunya Mountains Confirmation Camp for 19 young parishioners on the
theme, `a Time For\ldots' The Fight Reverend R E Wicks presided at the
Confirmation service on 3 October 1976.\footnote{Parish Magazine
  \emph{Shalom}, October 1976}

Parish Council's considered opinion was that `there is more than enough
work for two people to do in the parish' over and above the supporting
input of the many lay volunteers in all areas. The consensus was
emphatically directed to continued growth in the Youth section,
maintaining vigorous Sunday Schools in almost all centres with
particular mention of the very well attended one in Cherbourg, as well
as maintaining and further promoting the Healing Mission of the Order of
St Luke. All were urged to foster more involvement in existing ventures
and by encouraging contacts to assist with hospital and home visiting of
people in the local area, lead or participate in home Bible Study
groups, encourage greater church attendance and so on - all simple and
easy things for a willing heart, but of immense assistance to the
ever-growing list of Christian ministry duties open to all.

An early spring edition of the parish magazine (TAP), reinforced Rev
Campbell's focus on the missionary aspect of all church involvement,
highlighting the ABM's Mission in the Carpentaria area of coverage -
northern Cape York, the Torres Strait islands and into Papua; CMS's work
in Tanzania; the parish's aim to send a group to the CMS Summer School
to be held in Burleigh Heads, 13-19 January 1976. The publication also
dealt with matters of budget; a review recommended reading of the Book
of the Season - `The Escape', by Viola S Winn (\$2.20); a history of
Joseph Mohr's hymn `Silent Night'; various other thought-provoking items
such as `Can I be a Christian and not go to Church?' and much
more.\footnote{Parish Magazine \emph{Telling All People} (TAP) Spring,
  1976, Volume 1, Number 2} This appears to have been the last TAP
issued before the name changed to \emph{Shalom}.

Travel in a parish with six centres, three of them country towns, two
rural ones plus the Cherbourg Aboriginal Settlement, some more than 50
km apart, was obviously a big issue. Ministry to the six centres and, in
the early days to take the R.E. classes in the schools, meant Don was
frequently on the road. One day he was returning from the school at
Kilkivan and as he \emph{`came over the brow of a hill there were two
large trucks side by side coming up the hill and very close. Some parts
of the road were very narrow through cuttings but fortunately there was
some room off the road at this spot and all three vehicles passed with
inches to spare'.}

After three years as their rector, Don Campbell had begun discussing
with the Parochial Council how the parish might be more effective in
proclaiming the Gospel and building people up in their faith. Various
outreach options to nominal Anglicans and others desirous of deeper
investigation of spiritual issues had been considered.

\begin{quote}
`\emph{At each of the six centres we began to have an Annual Festival
followed by a meal. Regular attendees were encouraged to invite their
nominal friends and relatives. These services were well received and
some who came were encouraged to come more often.'}
\end{quote}

\section{The Bethel Bible Course}

This led to the idea of training people to be leaders for home groups.
To do this, confident leaders were needed. To give leaders confidence in
their faith and a solid understanding of the Bible, the Bethel Bible
Course idea was floated, receiving positive response in spite of the
lengthy period of dedicated study required. Even some of the more
elderly were moved to hone their learning skills and techniques. Much
credit must be given to the rector for the encouraging and persuasive
manner in which he promoted and implemented this course.

The Bethel course involved 26 sessions of 2 \nicefrac{1}{2} hours. The Old Testament
was covered in the first year and the New testament in the second year.
It was very demanding, and 21 people signed up for it in 1978. One group
met on Tuesday evenings in Murgon with a smaller group on Thursday
evenings in Goomeri. Each session had an illustration to help people
remember the main points of the lesson. Sometimes large amounts of the
Bible were required to be read before the actual study. The group
members did this and lives began to be changed as people grew in their
understanding of God's Amazing Grace in sending the Lord Jesus to
reconcile us to Him and to each other. The catchcry for the Bethel
course is ``Blessed to be a Blessing'', based on Genesis Chapter 12,
verses 1-3.

With such clearly evident and firm congregational support behind `their
man', the search

for a suitable Parish Assistant began in earnest. Miss Joan Evelyn Gray,
a trainee at Deaconess House, Sydney was approached and was happy to be
nominated. Due process was followed and a letter signed by Archbishop
Arnott was received consenting to her appointment as Parish Assistant,
(initially on a one-year basis as an experiment), beginning with a
salary of \$6,300 per annum with a house, car, gas and electricity etc.
paid by the parish. Rev Campbell's 12 October 1977 correspondence with
the Diocese announced her starting date as 1 February 1978. One of the
stated aims of her employment was `to assist with the Bethel Series in
the Parish'.

It would also seem that, during this same late 1977 period, Rev
Campbell's successful handling of `all things parish' had been noted as
his hand-written letter to the Archbishop expressed regret that he `did
not feel he could accept the' invitation to move to Booval parish at
that time', mainly because the parish had funded two weeks in Sydney in
September `to learn about the Bethel Bible Course'; he was the only one
trained to lead it in the parish; more people than he had `ever dared
hope' had enrolled; he felt leaving at that point would `negate much of
the aim' of endeavours so far'. The response from Brisbane was `very
understanding of his position\ldots' offered blessings for continued
work there and to the Campbell family for Christmas.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence Files 1977}

\section{Archie the Glove Puppet}

Among the initiatives was the introduction in Murgon of a Family Service
once a month. To gain the children's interest and attention, a glove
puppet named Archie would suddenly appear from behind a board. Later a
transportable puppet theatre was built for the parish and this became a
favourite part of the Family service. Archie developed a reputation as a
`\emph{Smart-Alec know-it-all}'. The theatre's reputation grew and its
activities were extended to other centres in the parish and beyond. By
1977 a thriving Youth Group with nearing 20 members operated in Murgon.
Some of the boys helped operate other glove puppets and met mid-week to
record the dialogue\emph{.}

\begin{quote}
Joan Gray also became a `straight-guy' to Archie. It is even more
amazing that these segments were greatly appreciated in spite of the
fact that they were largely ad-lib. As a further outreach the parish
`\ldots{} ran a stall at the Murgon show one year and showed film strips
relating to some of Jesus' parables (the high tec of the time!) Puppet
Archie also featured and sometimes his habit of being rather confronting
and saying things that a human person couldn't, caused a bit of a stir.
There were occasions when children became so upset, they ran up and
punched him in the face!
\end{quote}

It could be said the goal of gaining attention and involvement was fully
achieved.

\section{Beach Mission at Elliot
Heads}

In 1978 the Campbells were invited to lead a Scripture Union Beach
mission at Elliott Heads near Bundaberg in January 1979. Some 10
parishioners joined the SU team drawn from a number of denominations. A
training day was held for the whole team late in 1978. Each Evening
glove puppets told the story of ``The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe''
by C S Lewis.

\begin{quote}
The script needed 6 Puppeteers at various time and in the final battle
scene it needed some ingenuity to have 13 puppets on show at the one
time. It was a real hit not only with the children but with many
parents. Some came each night and left when the puppets finished. On the
last evening questions to the children showed they had really understood
the message.
\end{quote}

\section{Youth Safari}

In May 1979 it was decided to take a coach load of teenagers on a Safari
up through Monto and Biloela to Rockhampton. The group stayed in church
halls. It was a very valuable time with study/talk, discussion each
morning and activities in the evening as well as travel and sightseeing.
The boat trip to Great Keppel Island was a highlight.

As priests are often required to change parishes, housing is provided.
The Rectory at Murgon is most comfortable and very suitable but after
his incident and close-call with the semi-trailers, Don realised that if
anything happened to him, Lurline had no place to go with three small
children. After self-funded study at Theological college, the Campbells
had few reserves but `\emph{with God's help through loans from kind
relatives and a sympathetic bank manager',} they managed to get a
deposit for a small cottage at Caboolture. To help with repayments,
Lurline started to do supply teaching at primary and high state schools
in the area as well as a stint at the Convent. She continued to lead a
Bible Study at Cherbourg and to be involved in Parish and Christian
Women's Convention International activities.

Murgon had three Service clubs, Apex, Lions and Rotary. Don was invited
to join Rotary which led to valuable contacts in the Community for him
and Lurline. He was President one year. Another outreach into the
Community came through a series of `Belt the Rector' evenings when
parishioners would invite their friends to their homes when they could
ask and discuss any questions they wished.

The 1979 services roster in the parish for the main centres appears to
have remained almost unchanged from the 1975-1976 roster with Rev
Campbell's signature appearing against all Holy Communion services in
the parish each Sunday. In addition, Joan Gray's signature was attached
to several Morning Prayers services in Murgon as well as the other
parish centres, showing a great increase in the opportunities for
worship within the parish.\footnote{Parish Services Register etc}

\begin{quote}
On my return from the Youth Safari in 1979, there was a letter from the
Queensland (with Northern NSW) branch of the Church Missionary Society
inviting me to be the next General Secretary of the Branch. I felt
honoured to be considered but my immediate reaction was to decline as I
felt committed to finish the second year of the Bethel Bible Study
course at the end of 1979. I phoned one of the members of the CMS
Committee and said that I would have to decline as I was committed to
stay in the parish at least till the end of the year. ``Yes, we know
that, and we will wait!'' That caused me to stop and think and pray. If
the offer from CMS was of the Lord maybe there was another way to
approach the situation. To this end, in consultation with the Wardens
and Parish Council it was decided to send Mrs Marcia Mcintosh to the
Bethel training course. Marcia took over the course and at the end of
September the Campbells moved to Brisbane after more than six wonderful
years in the parish.
\end{quote}

The 1 June 1979 Diocesan Council noted that an official letter of
resignation had been received from Rev D K Campbell to take effect as
from 1 October 1979 and its official acceptance by the Archbishop, The
Most Reverend Felix Arnott. This was communicated in writing on 10 July
1979 to Mr D H Kay (church warden). \footnote{Diocesan Correspondence
  Files}

At Rev Don's last Parish Council meeting as their rector, Warden Ewen
McIntosh expressed the parish's sincere and deep appreciation of the
benefits, advice, spiritual guidance and fun times all had received from
him and from his wife and family through their drive and enthusiastic
involvement in all activities.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Minutes 3
  September. 1979, p. 116}

It was with great regret but with sincere congratulations on his posting
that a large number of parishioners farewelled the family on Sunday 30
September. Rev Campbell conducted two H C services in Christ Church,
Murgon that day, the first at 9.00am, then a 10.30am Family
Service\footnote{Parish Register} followed by luncheon in the hall.
Lurline Campbell's 1979 diary notes prompted Don to reflect:

\begin{quote}
`Apparently the packers came on Tuesday 25\textsuperscript{th}. We must
have gone to our new home in Gloucester Street South Brisbane, unpacked
and come back for the farewell. I was commissioned as General Secretary
to CMS in St John's Cathedral on Friday 14 September, by Archbishop
Arnott'
\end{quote}

All services thereafter until November were conducted by Joan
Gray.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Service Register}

Following his commissioning, Rev Campbell commenced his work as Missions
Chaplain, and General Secretary CMS in September 1979, a position he
held until 1993 when he became Rector of Surfers Paradise. During this
time he also served as a member of the Aboriginal and Islander Affairs
Committee and became Archdeacon of the Gold Coast from 1995 until 2004
when he retired. Archdeacon Emeritus Donald Keith Campbell and his wife
Lurline, now reside in Upper Coomera, where they are active in St
Matthew's, Coomera, one of three centres in the Parish of Gold Coast
North. The font from St Matthew's Kilkivan is now in this
centre.\footnote{Clergy Notes}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1979--1990 : Rector -- Rev Victor James
McNamara}

During the four months following the announcement of Rev Campbell's
impending October departure, Parochial Nominators Doug Kay, Keith Batts
and Geoff Baker sought a suitable nominee to fill the vacancy. A
Diocesan-issued list of available priests was carefully studied,
settling on Rev Victor James McNamara. Once approached, and with Rev
McNamara's favourable response in hand, approaches were made for his
official nomination `as our choice of Rector' on 3 August, 1979 while
Rev Campbell was finalizing his departure.

For the purposes of organizing the Archbishop's very crowded diary, as
early as 5 October 1979, the Archbishop's office contacted Mick
Kapernick (for discussions with other Wardens and their nominee) re the
possibility of Archbishop Arnott's flying to Kingaroy or Wondai for a
possible service of Induction for Rev McNamara in November around 3.30pm
on a Saturday, followed by a later service in Cherbourg. Alternatively,
the Induction could occur at 7.30 or 8.00pm on the Sunday.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence files}

The concept of taking light-plane flights for such occasions was a
marked change from the days of half a century earlier when travel to
these areas was, at best, by train and sometimes lasted up to a week.
Even when the new rectory was constructed in the 1950-1960 period, one
bedroom was specially designated as the `Bishop's Room'. The motor car
did enter the scene fairly early on, but the idea of a literally
`flying-visit' was only just becoming a reality.

Another graduate from Moore Theological College, Sydney, Rev McNamara
was ordained Deacon in 1972. He served as Assistant Curate in Dalby
(1972-1975), and was ordained as Priest in 1973. He accepted the
position of Vicar of Jandowae in 1975 and served there till his move as
Rector to the Parish of Kilkivan in 1979.\footnote{Diocesan Clergy
  Records p. 29}

Kilkivan parish welcomed Rev McNamara, wife Doreen and their five
vibrantly energetic children (Angela, Andrew, Wendy, and twins Timothy
and Kirsty) to the parish in mid-November, 1979. The rectory again rang
to the sound of happy young voices. His electrical and
wireless/television technical skills were soon put to good use by the
locals who were also happy to welcome a priest with a love of and great
interest in cricket. Rev Vic carried on the tradition of `ministers with
their endearing eccentricities'. At least at Boonara, he was soon noted
for leaving the door of his car open during service time, the radio on,
`\emph{to check the scores}!' when an `important' cricket match was
being played. An added bonus for him was the continuing presence of Miss
Joan Gray as Parish Assistant along with a co-operative and cohesive
Christian community.

Rev McNamara's first official duty as Rector was to conduct the 17
November Holy Matrimony service for Kennedy/Beasley. He began his
services rounds on 18 November with Murgon's 7.30am and 9.15 Holy
Communion services, then on to Goomeri at 11.00am, Cherbourg 6.00pm and
a hurried trip to Kilkivan for 7.30 pm Holy Communion there.\footnote{Parish
  of Kilkivan Services Register November 1979 DJ 3, Box 5}

The following Sunday, 25 November 1979, after conducting a 7.15am
Eucharist with 40 present and 33 communicants, the day was spent
preparing for his 3.00pm official Induction. An overflowing local
congregation was present to witness Archbishop Felix Arnott perform this
rite. An impressive list of dignitaries - Archdeacon L W Grayson; Rural
Dean and Rector of Gympie, B Q Scragg; and Rectors: Philip C Robinson,
Nanango; Bill Ross, Wondai; Michael Scragg, Maryborough; R G Walsh,
Rector, and Rev S James, Kingaroy; and C E Brook, Noosa, signed as
witness to Archbishop Arnott's signature.

Rev McNamara was officially welcomed by Mick Kapernick, warden, on 4
December 1979.\footnote{Parish of Kilkivan Minutes, 1979, p. 118} The
Year Book for the period indicates a dedicated parish with an active
support team working with the Rector. Doug Kay and Mick (I D) Kapernick
continued their long service as Wardens with Doug Kay, Keith Batts and
Geoff Baker holding the position of Parochial Nominators. There were 22
Sunday School teachers over four centres with a total of 184 students
enrolled; 22 Baptisms; 13 young people were confirmed and 13 Marriages
solemnised. Following a subsequent Annual Meeting Keith Batts was joined
by John Waldock as Synodsmen.\footnote{Diocesan Year Books both p. 82}

Planning was underway for the proposed Youth Safari 80. Under the
leadership of Max Patten, painting of the Holy Spirit church at
Cherbourg was underway with local volunteers. All 21 persons had
successfully completed the two-year Bethel course. Marcia McIntosh was
leading the parish into the Congregational Phase with groups being
formed in all interested centres. The men's five-day September fishing
trip to Fraser Island had come and gone with a nice lot of fish to show
for it. The only `cloud' was that once again the parish was in an
overdraft situation of \$2,936.32 on the rector's arrival, had now risen
steeply \$5,517. However, this was not view as a great problem since all
expenditure was expected to produce financial gains. Direct giving, a
new concept for consideration was floated. Conservatism prevailed with
promises `to give it some thought' along with the strong recommendation
for the envelope system to continue. There was even optimistic talk of
hiring another person with a specially dedicated role of Parish Youth
Person. The only variation to the services roster was the introduction
of whole-of-parish services on the 5\textsuperscript{th} Sunday services
-- a great fellowship opportunity for all centres to come together for
worship. The first of these coincided with the 30 September farewell to
the Campbell family.

With the parish moving along energetically, an early highlight occurred
when Archbishop Sir John Grindrod, who had taken up the position in
1980, was welcomed to the parish where he conducted the Rite of
Confirmation with Holy Communion on 17 September, 1982.

Throughout 1979 and into the early 1980s the signatures of both McNamara
and Joan Gray appeared in regular pattern as officiating at Holy
Communion and either Morning or Evening Prayer respectively, throughout
the parish. Occasional services were delivered by other ministers and
lay persons, such as S James, Bill Gedge, Mick Kapernick and Ewen
McIntosh. The parish was well served in this regard. During March 1983
the Diocesan Registrar, N C Reid advised that Bruce David Boucher
(Murgon), Henry Derek Collins (Cherbourg) and Marcia Gay McIntosh
(Boonara) were officially accepted to be licenced as Liturgical
Assistants -- Mrs McIntosh with a full licence, allowing her to conduct
services, preach, and conduct funerals as well as the other LA duties
such as administering the chalice. Mick Kapernick's licence was renewed.
Later, Shirley Waldock was admitted as a Liturgical Assistant, so along
with Keith Batts in Kilkivan, the parish was well covered with local lay
assistance -- their names appearing frequently in the registers as
officiant. The McNamara family took their annual vacation leave,
post-Christmas/early January, and almost all services in this period
were conducted by lay persons.

Rev McNamara was well-versed in church law and protocols. He is credited
with bringing the parish into `the age of the computer', using his
word-processing skills in continuing to produce the \emph{Shalom}
magazine and for office communications and sermon notes. He added many
interesting articles and comments, using the pen-name \emph{`Don
Vittorio'}. Some parishioners were of the opinion that he was `spending
too much time in the office -- at that computer!' With administration
duties continuing to grow, a part-time office secretary, Mrs May
Maudsley, was employed.

The sacramental services of Baptism and Marriage remained as a feature
of priestly routine, as did the inevitable funerals, though some of them
were conducted by licenced lay assistants.

Funerals on two consecutive days in August 1982 were noted -- that of
Irene Sharpe in Murgon on 15\textsuperscript{th} followed by a 16 August
funeral for the McNamaras' old friend, Malcolm Keith Grundy, which
involved a return trip to their former parish of Jandowae.\footnote{Parish
  services register, 1 Sept 85}

From the late 1970s, the vagaries of weather again impacted heavily on
this largely farming community. A prolonged drought was mitigated
slightly by occasional advantageous rainfalls, though the
often-optimistic hopes of a bumper crop were mostly dashed by rapidly
returning dry conditions or storm-rains and which also reduced or
totally destroyed final yields. Repercussions were felt in the dependant
organisations throughout the area.

By 1981 parish finances were feeling the increased pressures. Normal
cost--of-living salary increases for the two staff members were accepted
without question. Diocesan stipend rates by August 1981 had increased to
\$10,420 pa. At the monthly parish council meeting, Sharon Lord
(secretary) was directed to contact the Diocesan Registrar, Mr Norman
Reid. advising that along with supporting a priest the desired aim was
to `\emph{work towards keeping an assistant in the Parish\ldots finances
have been difficult this year and we find we cannot meet an assessment
of \$3,900.'} A reduction to \$3,000 was mentioned as a possible
commitment for 1981 and forward.\footnote{Diocesan Correspondence files
  11 August 1981 and 26 August 1981}

Regretfully, by late 1981, due to pressing financial issues, the parish
was forced to relinquish Joan Gray's valued services. Assistance given
by the Lay Assistants became even more valuable and appreciated,
especially in the smaller dependencies such as Windera and Boonara -
great benefit with no reduction in opportunities to worship at their
local churches. Grant monies for ministry to Cherbourg, through the
Diocese from the Mary Peattie Trust Fund, continued and their value grew
in significance.

By 1983, Rev McNamara began trialling mid-week service Friendship
Services in Goomeri and Kilkivan, mainly as a pastoral outreach to the
elderly and mothers with young families who found it difficult to attend
church at the scheduled Sunday times. These were relaxed, productive
devotional times where even the most energetic and vocal children felt
welcome. These proved to be a valuable addition to the schedule for the
duration of his incumbency, resulting in increased participation in
activities, Guild membership as just one example.

Visits and talks by Gideons International became more frequent and their
efforts supported Former pharmacist and valued church member, Trevor
Cichero returned to conduct the 20 May 1983 funeral of local resident
and friend, Tony Shaw. Goomeri has a habit of `drawing people back'.

The succeeding years were studded with memorable events in parish life.
Growing community interest and involvement in service is evident through
the signatures of lay persons including N Greenbury, M J Somerfield, J S
Rea, E Wessling N Smith D Boucher in Murgon alone, accepting simple
chores of accounting for the offerings. Other centres followed this same
trend with great local involvement.

In 1983 the parish was again blessed with the presence of His Grace, the
Archbishop Sir John Grindrod for a 9.30am Confirmation service.

Also, in November, Murgon hosted the Mothers' Union
25\textsuperscript{th} Anniversary Service, led by V McNamara with guest
presenter, Rev R G Walsh (Kingaroy). With 100 attending and 80 receiving
Holy Communion it was acclaimed `a very successful day'.

Amusing comment: \emph{The 17 November, early morning H C Service in
Kilkivan, (9 in attendance and 7 communicants). No men present!}
\footnote{Parish services register entries 11, 15, 17 November, 1983}

As the years rolled by, this parish, with Murgon as its hub, continued
to be noted for its support of projects great and small in all of its
centres, no less so during McNamara's incumbency, several carrying
parish historical significance.

In June 1983, the rector and parish wardens applied for a faculty to
install a memorial lead-light window depicting the parable of The Sower
in Goomeri's Church of the Epiphany, in honour of the pioneer Beresford
family, to be made in Gympie by R and J Harrison. Duly granted under
Archbishop Sir John Grindrod's signature.\footnote{Diocesan
  Correspondence files, 1983 - 1984}

\emph{Shalom} mentions the dedication in 1984 of a silver plated, gold
lined Chalice, suitably inscribed, donated in memory of Joyce Quinn
(McIntosh), grand-daughter of pioneer and churchman, Richard Maudsley,
daughter of Ethel McIntosh who died following her daughter's birth in
1919, and wife and mother to G C (Chappie) Quinn also a churchman for
many years in the parish, by the Quinn family. \footnote{Shalom, Vol 9,
  No. 5, p. 9, 1985 and Boonara Centenary Book p. 18}The thread of this
enduring connection remained evident through many baptisms and weddings
was again visible through the 1 October 1986 funeral of Richard's
daughter, Elizabeth Pretoria McIntosh.\footnote{Services Register 1986}
A new Altar cloth was presented in her honour.

However, life and death go hand in hand. Parish `icon', Bill Gedge left
this life in July 1984 passing quietly while seated behind the wheel of
his car, neatly parked in his garage, having just returned from a trip
down-town. At his request, he was cremated at Albany Creek Crematorium.
The parish honoured him with a Memorial Service in Christ Church Murgon
on 30 July 1984. Rev Alf Gerlach returned for this sad but special
occasion. Active till his last breath, Bernard Ashmede (Bill) Gedge's
legacy lives on through the imposing presence of the Parish Hall and in
the memories of all who knew him.

Rev McNamara seemed to have a particular passion for Baptisms and knack
of presenting them `with a difference'. In September 1985 he undertook
six baptisms in one 7.00pm service at Holy Trinity church Windera,
admitting Melody Jane and Cara Curtis, Tenielle Maree Kratzmann and
Belinda, Michael and Tony Green into church family
membership.\footnote{Parish services register, 1 Sept 85}

From \emph{Shalom}, of June 1986 referring to the baptism of Leah
Hatton, Rev McNamara followed his usual custom of mixing both hot and
cold water `\emph{so the temperature of the water does not unduly
disturb the baby. However, to his consternation, he had put too much hot
water in\ldots{} the fetcher of the required cold water'} was heard to
comment: `\emph{He is the first minister that I have ever met who gives
swimming lessons to a baby when he baptises it!'} \footnote{Shalom, Vol
  10, No. 3, June 1986}

The Boonara services register of 9 October records the baptism of Mrs
Alice Stumm. \emph{Shalom} records she `\emph{took the plunge' as far as
Christian commitment is concerned \ldots when she was baptised beside
Boonara Creek. Thirty people including husband Paul and two children,
Daniel and Michelle, were present to see Alice take this very important
step in her life\ldots'} While the event was `beside the creek' Alice
was not immersed, though creek water was used in the
ceremony.\footnote{Shalom, Vol 12, No. 5, October 1988}

Former parish member and very good friend of the McNamara family recalls
a 1989 parish-hosted visit from Bishops George Browning (Brisbane
Diocese, northern region). Bishop Browning shared Rod's interest in Bush
Walking and an expedition to Barambah Falls in the steep gorges on the
Boonimbah Road through a Galloway Downs property was undertaken. Several
church members accompanied them. Rod provided the accompanying photo
with the notation indicating himself, Bishop George Browning, Tim, Wendy
and Andrew McNamara and Eddie Wessling were pictured. Rev Vic was also
present but behind the camera.

Vic noted for his generous effort to promote parish unity -- hosting his
annual Christmas BBQs -- he provided the meat -- parishioners provided
the sweets. Whole of Parish services -- Combined Guild parish dinners
(Goomeri) as community events -- well received and patronized.

Despite all valiant efforts, debt spiralled to the point where every
payment of the regular stipend became a recurring search for funds, a
drain on the parish group's working funds. Although always assured the
salary would be found, at the expense of any other commitment, with a
wife and five children to support this concerned Rev McNamara. Added to
this was his very deep concern and distress that all efforts to the
contrary seemed to be failing under his leadership. Although assured
though external circumstances, not lack of drive or effort by all
concerned

Hindsight provides a view of changing district demographics beginning as
early as the lead into the 1960s. Larger holdings to support family
businesses were seen a more viable option to the smaller dairy and mixed
farming holdings. Government supported acquisitions of
`the-farm-next-door' and the registering of family businesses names and
family trusts were seen as positive moves aiming to support rural
industries and keep young people in these areas.

The period witnessed an enormous surge in the emphasis on higher
education with `High Tops' being added to primary schools in Goomeri and
Kilkivan thus allowing local children to achieve an education to a level
equivalent to the current Year 10 without leaving home. Bus services to
schools proliferated and education to Year 12 level was then also
available at the existing nearby High School in Murgon. With higher
educational qualifications, and the lure of a regular income, many
secured off-farm employment, which took them out of the district.
Tertiary study and entry into professional occupations with more
lucrative and fulfilling employment became an achievable goal.

Rev McNamara's sincere concern for parish welfare led him to confide in
his wardens that, after eleven happy years with them, he felt it was
time to move on so a `new-broom' could look at the situation with fresh
eyes. With their permission he began investigation the family's possible
future.

(754) Left Kilkivan parish late (December?) 1990. Assistant Curate at St
Peter's Gympie 1991-1994. Held a Missions Chaplain role. Locum Tenens
Cunnamulla 199 4-1996. Appointed Priest in Charge -- Southern Gulf
stationed in Normanton. 1996. In process of moving south to take up a
House Parents position in an Anglican facility when he passed
unexpectedly in Normanton 20 March 2001.\footnote{Clergy Records, p. 25}

\section{1990--1991 : Rev Gerald Greaves (Locum
Tenens)}

\textbf{Clergy notes from Archives records Anecdotes etc. Something from
Gerald. Photo of him with LAs on Murgon church steps scanned}

\printendnotes
\setcounter{endnote}{0}
\chapter{1991--1997 : Rev Bavin John
Clarke.}

(Bruce 753) Deacon and Priest 1988- Diocese of N Q. Deacon Assistant --
St James' Cathedral 1988. Assistant Priest St Js' Cath. 1988-89.
Curate/Precentor (Cathedral) 90/91. Chaplain -- Mission to Seamen 91.
Rector -- Kilkivan 91

His name was brought by the Bishop of the Western Region (Bishop ??) to
the attention of Parish Wardens and Parochial Nominators I D Kapernick,
E B Mcintosh and K A Batts, who subsequently interviewed him and,
(impressed?) by his voluminous file of references and recommendations,
though still a little hesitant regarding his lack of parish experienced,
successfully moved to have him appointed as Priest in Charge for a trial
period.

(755) His support consisted of a hard-working Parish Council and
administrative team. Husband and wife Keith and Margorie Batts accepted
the position of Synod Representatives. An average of 20 communicants
each Sunday, 10 Baptisms, 15 candidates confirmed and 15 marriages are
recorded. 1991 Year Book p. 78 He was subsequently `appointed as Rector'
without any consultation with Parish personnel.

It was during this time that there were moves by the Cherbourg community
to become a separate Parish under the control of Indigenous Ministries.
Two Indigenous Ministers were appointed in succession, after only short
periods in Cherbourg. While in residence they had sole responsibility
for ministry in Cherbourg whilst remaining under the umbrella and
guidance of Fr Bavin Clarke. The community achieved Provisional Parish
Status under Rev Jenny Thompson and were removed from Parish of Kilkivan
control. However, this venture did not prove viable in the long run and
Cherbourg reverted to Kilkivan (Barambah) Parish control in 2000.

A section on Holy Spirit Church, Cherbourg can be found on Page.

Fr Bavin's time in the Parish of Kilkivan came to a close in 1997.
Finances were in a state of decline and the Parish lost its Benefice
status.

Brett Kapernick in Murgon Church 100 email file -- Ladies Guild
President's report

(759 YB p.24)Bavin still at Murgon 1996.

(760) Synod reps Alan and Elizabeth Meizer.

\chapter{1998--2002 : Rev Norman William
Wagstaff.}

Some photos available in church albums

(767) Rev Wagstaff studied at St Francis' College Brisbane qualifying
with a Th. L. Dip (ACT), was ordained Deacon 1975 and Priest 1976 in the
Diocese of Rockhampton where he served as Assistant Curate at St
Mathew's church, Park Avenue.

He was appointed Priest-in-charge of Barcaldine (1977-1978) and promoted
to Rector until 1980 when he moved as Priest in Charge to Moranbah
(1980-1981). In a change from parish life, he accepted a position as
Chaplain to Geriatric Institutions (1981-1987) beginning a period or
many overlapping duties -- Chaplain to Rockhampton Hospital (1982-1987).
Parish life was added to these duties by taking up the position Priest
in Charge, Mt Morgan (1986-1987) then Rector, The Barcoo, 1987-1993).

His move into the Diocese of Brisbane commenced with his 1993-1997
appointment as Rector, St Peter's Millmerran and Missions Chaplain
(1997).

Came as a widower accompanied a big pet dog. He was not a well man and
in his own words `came kicking and screaming' to the parish. During his
first visit in the company of Bishop (Wood?) he fell asleep during the
evening Parish Council meeting; not an auspicious beginning. Happily, it
can be reported that any misgivings on both sides were fairly quickly
dispelled.

It was during Fr Norman's incumbency, in 1998, that the Parish of Wondai
was amalgamated into the Parish of Kilkivan.

History of events leading to the moves to merge the two parishes

Although Rev Wagstaff approached the task with positivity, health issues
with his lungs impeded his efforts. Even health problems can bring
unexpected positive results. God does move in mysterious ways! Fr
Norman's association with Murgon Hospital brought him into contact with
the Director of Nursing and `love blossomed' into marriage. His new
wife, Gwenn, can be credited with paving the way for a different regime
of treatment for his lung condition which made life easier. This all
needs rewording and reorganizing Photos of wedding

Although in 1997 Fr Norman came as Priest in Charge of Kilkivan Parish
and Locum Tenens to Wondai, from 1998 the ensuing parish was named in
Diocesan records as the \textbf{Provisional} \textbf{Parish of Barambah}
with Fr Norman as Priest in Charge\textbf{.} Adding the centres of
Wondai, Mondure, Proston and Hivesville to Kilkivan Parish's Windera,
Goomeri, Kilkivan, Boonara and Murgon was, from the start, and
over-optimistic endeavour even with an extensive team of liturgical
assistants working diligently and providing services in all centres.
Diocesan Correspondence Files 1998

Fr Norman was very grateful for the strong support given him by Mr and
Mrs Allan and Elizabeth Meizer who were the Synod representatives when
he arrived. They were also Parish Wardens along with Mr Tom McAntee. Mrs
Meizer also acted as Office Manager. There was a slight `changing of the
guard' during 1998 with A Meizer, T McAntee and C E Weier accepting
nominations as Wardens, and Mrs P Hansen and Mr P Phipps endorsed as
Synod representatives. Mrs K M Schmidhauser is also included later. The
number of communicants per week remained around 43 but a decline to one
Baptism, one Marriage and no Admissions to Communion or Confirmations,
was noted with concern. 1998 Year Book p. 72 The 1999 Year Book p. 96
has a listing for Kilkivan with the notation `Refer Barambah'.
Thankfully, numbers again increased with p.83 entry in the 1999 year
book showing Barambah Parish with 52 weekly communicants, 11 Baptism and
five Marriages. Funerals seem to have remained steady at around seven
per year. Reorganize

The names listed above show a very positive spirit of co-operation
between the two former parish congregations.

Fr Norman retired from full-time ministry due to ill health in 2002.

The 2002 Y B p. 78 lists Barambah as vacant. Wardens M G McIntosh, S
Waldock, C Weier. Synod P N Hansen and B R Hockey.+

and he and Gwynn moved to Carlyle Gardens Retirement Village in Bargara.
Fr Norman has continued part-time work in the Bundaberg Parish where his
services -- mainly in Bargara -- are greatly valued by the people there
and the Parish as a whole.

No full-time minister has been employed in Barambah Parish since 2002,
though services continued to be conducted by the team of lay assistants
with some visiting clergy assistance.

My tribute as his priests warden in farewell service on his leaving the
parish.

\textbf{Photos of Ross Wessling and Judith Kollings' wedding}

\chapter{More Troubled Times}

\section{2002/- : No resident priest}

At the time of writing, no full-time resident Priest has been incumbent
in the Parish for the 18 years since 2002. During the 2002/2003 period
the idea of a United Ministries District run from Kingaroy was mooted.
Initially, Nanango and Barambah parishes were mooted as being included
under Kingaroy's \textbf{Rev Geoffrey Bradford}, with assistant clergy
to be appointed. However, Nanango parish resisted strongly and were not
included in the eventual trial. Nor were any further assisting clergy
appointments made. This venture proved an arduous task. The travelling
time between centres from Kingaroy to Kilkivan meant that scheduled
services were usually started by the rostered lay person and often
progressed to the gradual hymn before the priest's hurried and fully
gowned arrival. Bishop Raymond Smith once stood in for Fr Geoffrey. His
only comment to us on the situation was a concerned and sad shake-of-the
head. Eventually it had a serious effect on Fr Geoffrey's health and
life in general, leading to his departure from the Kingaroy parish and
the abandonment of the concept at that time. Licenced lay persons kept
the doors of all centres in Barambah parish open and to distribute the
reserved sacrament of Holy Communion to the sick and shut-ins following
irregular, and valued Eucharists by visiting clergy. Some were also
licences to conduct funerals if required.

\section{2003--2005 : Fr John Pryce-Davies (Locum
Tenens)}

Through the efforts of the western regions Bishop, \textbf{Fr John
Pryce-Davies}, living in Redcliffe, was approached and accepted a 3
days/week Priest-in-Charge? position in Barambah. The parish offered him
the use of the parish car to travel to and from his home, all costs
covered, in addition to parish usage. The Liturgical Assistants from the
various and distanced centres were brought together in regular training
and discussion gatherings with many forward steps resulting. It was an
eventful period of great co-operation where some very hard decisions in
the parish were taken and acted upon. Photos.

\section{The Vann Estate and Lay
Ministry}

As soon as he arrived Fr John saw the need for greater pastoral care in
the area and began discussions with Bishop Nolan (Western Region) to
address this. A former Murgon resident and parishioner, Mr George Vann,
had bequeathed a very large sum of money to the Diocese for this purpose
several years before and although some tentative enquiries had been
made, nothing had progressed. Fr John and Bishop Nolan took this up
again and out of this took the first step forward with the idea of
appointing a Lay Minister with special focus on pastoral care. In due
course, and after Diocesan approval \textbf{Mrs Marcia McIntosh} was
appointed to the position in a special service of commissioning on
\textbf{May 29, 2004}. A position which she held until the Parish AGM 28
February 2015. Although this was an honorary lay position, a sum of
\$100/week was provided from the Vann Estate monies to cover some
running and sundry expenses for the task during the period of
commissioned service. Some photos of retirement gifts? Lovely cross?
Certificate of Appreciation?

A separate section on the George Vann Estate can be found on Page?????

\textbf{2005:} Fr Pryce-Davies relinquished his locum position during
2005, travel and family ties influencing his decision. His regular
services were greatly missed. Several most welcome retired priests
continued to fill the void with occasional short stays and joyously
welcomed. Some became very dear friends over many following years, not
least of these being the late Canon Ron Dyson. Photo

\section{Windera and Hivesville Churches
Close}

Always very hard and emotional decisions surround the closure of church
centres. During \textbf{2005,} the churches of Holy Trinity, Windera and
Holy Spirit, Hivesville were affected in this way. The properties were
disposed of during that year. (Photos) The Windera church building found
its way to the Cloyna State School and a new role as the Library
building. The beautifully restored Hivesville church building now
fulfils the role of Chapel in the Murgon Dairy Museum and Historical
Complex. See separate sections on both Pages ????.

\section{2007 : Rev Fang Ling Liaw
Quested}

Mrs Quested, a newly ordained priest resident in the neighbouring parish
of Nanango where her husband Michael was rector, accepted a 3 days/week
position in Barambah parish from 7 February where the parish car was
again provided for travelling to and from as well as within the parish
-- all costs covered -- was again provided. It proved a time of
turbulence for her in spite of her prayerful and dedicated efforts. The
ageing population seemed to find her accent difficult to contend with
and there were some personality clashes with a few unsympathetic and
out-spoken parishioners. During this time one of her young children
experienced serious health problems which, added to these other
stresses, led her decision to resign the position, effective 30
September, 2007. Though only a very short-lived period, Ref Fang Ling's
stay proved interesting and eventful and paved the way for a number of
future developments in the life of the church. (Photos?)

Michael Quested in one of Bev Kapernick's photos. Most in Church 100
photos but some in downloads somewhere (?).

\section{2010 : Christ Church turns 90.}

Christ Church Murgon celebrated the 90\textsuperscript{th} Anniversary
with the Right Reverend Robert Nolan, Western Regional Bishop, presiding
and preaching at an 09 May Eucharist at 3.30pm.

A sumptuous and scrumptious repast (thought titled `light refreshments)
followed in the hall. The evening was rounded off with delightful
entertainment which included:

Skits. Fashion Parade including vintage along with current garments
kindly provided by local business ??? (Pam Dowdle's shop?) and modelled
by congregation members from across the parish. Some unique modelling
presentations kept the atmosphere light and full of happy laughter. None
present would ever forget Boonara's Alice Stumm. Display of Bridal Gowns
organized by Shirley Walsock. Photos available.

\section{2013 : Closure St Matthew's Church
Kilkivan}

St Matthew's Church Kilkivan closed its doors after 125 years on the
reluctant motion of Mavis O'Neill. Seconded by Mr Gordon McGill, local
long-serving Kilkivan church members and, with sad hearts duly passed by
those gathered there representing all centres of the parish. The
property was sold to Gympie Regional Council in 2014. Many church
wardens and parish councillors and other valued volunteers had their
spiritual roots in Kilkivan. Alternate wording? The decision to cease
worship and close the church there was not taken lightly but with great
regret and heart ache. Both the mover of the closure motion and its
seconder were long-standing, faithful communicant members of St
Matthew's. The building still stands on the site. A 36 page history of `
Anglican church' in Kilkivan was prepared for the centenary in 1988, by
locals, Betty Roach and Shirley Mc Gill. Copies are held in the Diocesan
Archives, Brisbane. The building still stands on the site fronting the
highway.

\section{2012--2014 : Rev Rhonda Hunt}

Rev Rhonda Hunt - travelled from Kingaroy to serve as a non-stipended
part-time minister in Barambah Parish. Her assistance in providing for
the sacraments of Baptism and Marriage were valued and appreciated as
well as her involvement in the regular distribution of Holy Communion to
the various centres, though mainly restricted to Wondai and Murgon.
(Photos from album)

\section{2015 : Closure St Peter's Church,
Proston}

St Peter's Church, Proston, officially closed on Saturday,
14\textsuperscript{th} November, 2015.

The following article is from the last ever printed Focus re the
relocation of the remains of benefactor Charles Shepherd from beneath
the church.

OR

Full copy of the article headed ``From the Final Printed Version of
``Focus'

The late Eric Cridland was pall-bearer when his remains were moved from
Proston Cemetery for burial beneath the Church building during its
construction. Burstows Funerals, Toowoomba on both occasions (?).) All
Proston Anglican church property has now been sold and the church
building itself has begun its new life as a private residence.

\textbf{2004 -- 2015}

\textbf{Separate chapter on Units? File on correspondence and
progression of moves with me. Re-hash written as an historical record by
Ruth for this part???}

\textbf{Marcia McIntosh}: I was currently serving as a fully licenced
Liturgical Assistant, conducting services and funerals as well as
general pastoral work at this time. A significant bequest by Mr George
Vann had been left for the `provision of Aged Care in the Murgon
District'. Diocesan moves were being made to extend and enhance existing
facilities at Hervey Bay.

The `tyranny of distance', lack of easily accessed transport facilities
such as bus and train and the separation or elderly people from spouse
and other family members the Hervey Bay proposal came to the fore This
direction was vigorously opposed by the Parish and community in general.
Extensive and somewhat forceful communication began. Due to the
recommendation by Fr John Price-Davies and the perceived need to prove
the necessity of extra service to, and facilities for, the aged of the
community of Murgon and surrounds, I was commissioned by Bishop Robert
Nolan on \textbf{29\textsuperscript{th} May, 2014, as a Lay Minister}
and continued to provide Pastoral Care, preach and conduct funerals in
the Parish, with an allowance of \$100/week allocated from the Vann
bequest to cover some fuel costs in this ministry. The Commissioning
Service also served to honour Mr Vann and his valued generosity, by
respectfully distributing his ashes in the gardens in the church grounds
and the hanging of a plaque in the church vestry recognizing his
contribution to the aged of the area. (Photos in church albums.)

A significant portion of Mr Vann's bequest was eventually used locally
and an Aged Care -- Independent Living Complex was finally erected in
Krebs Street, Murgon.

I continued in the Lay Minister role till the Parish AGM in February,
2015 when I resigned from position and moved permanently to Redcliffe.
As at the time of writing, I continue to return to Barambah Parish and
other places in South East Queensland -- at the request of families - to
conduct funerals for their loved ones and my friends made during my many
years living and working in the Murgon/Goomeri area.

NEW HEADING -- NEW CHAPTER?

Eg: Demographic Changes and Rural? Decline?

``Glimpses Through The Years'', produced for the Centenary Celebrations
at Church of The Epiphany, Goomeri held 2016 gives an insight into
recent parish history. Ref endnote `Glimpses Through the Years' p 21.

The Parish was visited once a month by Clergy who have volunteered their
services to the Western Region (of the Brisbane Diocese). Many thanks to
these Ministers who provide the sacrament of Holy Communion, originally
at Wondai and Murgon for those who can make their way to these centres
though later Goomeri and Boonara were given an occasional service in
place of the Murgon one. Sadly. even this minimal ministry was curtailed
during the Covid-19 pandemic with devastating effects on an already
severely depleted congregational base. Baptisms are generally arranged
to coincide with these visits with prior interviews and book work
carried out by competent LAs. Confirmation lessons which were offered by
the Liturgical Assistants as the need arose have disappeared from the
calendar. With the inescapable reality of increasing age, disability and
deaths, even the LA base has been depleted to three -- none or whom are
resident in Murgon.

The Reserved Sacrament, once a valued service extended to residents of
two district nursing homes -- Castra in Murgon and Forest View in Wondai
-- to the sick and shut-ins throughout the Parish and in the Hospitals
by those LAs who are so licenced has followed this downward trend and
suspended for the major part of 2020. Funerals became occasional Covid
-19 restricted affairs with few allowed to attend, conducted by licenced
LAs, invited Clergy, or other persons as approved by the Western Region
Bishop, Cameron Venables, occasionally in the church buildings but more
often at the Kingaroy Crematorium chapel or as graveside events.

Parish members are extremely grateful for the ministries of members of
the Clergy who have visited

and provided Holy Communion and spiritual nourishment over these past
years, including, among

others,who provided short term assistance: Archdeacon Tom Hood, Canon
Ron Dyson, Rev'd Stuart James, Fr Gerald Greaves, Rev'd John Pinson, Fr
Geoffrey Reeder. Fr Tom Hall and the Achor ministries team\emph{.}

Sadly, several of these special people and at least two former Rectors
have passed away in recent times. However, the memory and the benefits
of their ministries remain with the communities of Barambah Parish.

\chapter{Prominent Citizens}

\section{Bernard Ashmead (Bill)
Gedge}

While a great many people have offered selfless service which could
justly be researched and recorded here, Bill's passing from this earthly
life in \ldots.. seems to have provided a fitting niche in which to
include this small tribute of Bill Gedge and his loved wife, May, as a
clear and encompassing examples of unstinting devotion and tireless
service of the many, to the Murgon church and, indeed, to the whole
parish.

Throughout many decades Bill Gedge and his wife, May's, names appeared
regularly in all facets of the life of the parish. Bill, as he was
dubbed in true Aussie style, sailed from England and arrived in Sydney
late in his teenage years. He soon moved to Casino where he worked on a
farm and met and married Ethel \underline{May} Oliver. After dairy
farming there, May's asthma necessitated a change of climate and a move
with the family of three to Murgon in Queensland eventuated. He
purchased a Carrying business for farm produce and cream for the local
Butter factory. He earned a reputation an `very hard-working and
reliable\ldots especially strong the way he could throw the cream cans
and bags of farm produce around to a second layer in the truck with such
ease and do it all day too'.

He put his expert and much-loved vehicle driving experience to weekend
use, driving the procession of rectors through the years around the
parish, firstly introducing them to the routine and to the differing
congregations, then on throughout the times following, simply
accompanying and/or assisting them on Sunday duties, always leading the
hymns with `enthusiasm and vigour'\ldots.`even when there was no musical
accompaniment' to his life's end. He was found deceased behind the wheel
of his car, carefully parked in his own garage not long after having
been shopping in Murgon's main street

As soon as they had arrived in Murgon, Bill made contact with the local
church where the family members volunteered their assistance. Lawn
mowing immediately drew Bill's regular `spare time' attention -- no
motor or ride-on mowers then. This remained `his job' until around the
time of his retirement from paid employment when after the formation of
his strongly supported Youth Group, they started having BBQs! He did not
wish to see what this activity might do to `his lawns'! Some hip and
knee problems may have also had some contributing effect. This same
diminished mobility led to his grasping the opportunity of employment at
the Butter Factory. This allowed a physically easier life in town with
May and the family. Right from the start of their Murgon life, the
Gedges `green thumbs' began their influence on church finances. Fresh
and preserved goods began appearing as gifts and for sale purposes with
the proceeds to guild coffers. In fact, a substantial portion of the
cost of the church hall came from the accumulated proceeds of such sale
items. The move into the factory job also meant he had more time for his
ever more extensive vegetable garden, in spite of a stiff leg and
eventual use of two sticks to assist walking. His compromised physical
abilities caused the members a bit of angst as Bill determinately
continued the ever-present maintenance work on buildings, including
external painting of the church.

`The loss of May in 1968 with an asthma attack combined with an
underlying heart problem left Bill without his best mate and support.'
He sold his house and extensive garden and moved into a flat. Problem!
No Garden!

A couple of anecdotes:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Bill's great mate, Mick Kapernick, `arrived home from work one day to
  find the areas between his driveway tracks dug up and planted with
  vegies.' Mick and Marion's son Brett clearly recalls the incident and
  the Kapenick family's quick reaction of the offer of some land:
\end{itemize}

\begin{quote}
I remember that clearly as he utilised our spare allotment in Murgon to
grow all kinds of vegetables to sell to raise money for painting and
maintenance on the hall.~ He would donate the money to the hall account.
He was very dedicated to the church.~ He managed to dig the ground, grow
and harvest the vegetables with two artificial hips and a knee. I
remember quite fondly the sound of him with his crutches.'
\end{quote}

The move to cultivating the Kapernick's allotment leads to the second
anecdote.

\begin{quote}
One day, in his `allotment garden/farm', his stiff legs caused him to
overbalance into his wheelbarrow where he was stuck, in the hot sun, for
a couple of hours. Passers-by happily waved cheerfully to him,
blissfully unaware that it was a predicament, not just a rest period,
and he happily (?) waved back. Eventually, and thankfully, he was
rescued.
\end{quote}

Bill and May were devoted members of the Murgon Anglican Church and its
needs were always a priority in their lives with lay preaching, parish
council, office bearing position also featuring in Bill's diary while
May's support was directed to more support of Mothers Union and Guild
activities. Bill was a frequent preacher at Cherbourg and he always took
a box of fresh vegetables with him to share there.

A very fitting tribute to (Bill) Bernard Ashmede Gedge was vegetables
instead of flowers to decorate the `his' Christ Church for his funeral
-- (date)

\section{Krebs Family}

The choice of site for the Vann Memorial Units in Krebs Street is, in
itself, significant as the Krebs family have figured prominently in the
history of Murgon town. John (Jack) Krebs was a builder and the local
funeral director. In addition, the family conducted the very successful
family owned and operated hardware and farm supplies store of `J Krebs
and Sons' serving the whole Murgon district. These businesses were
operated in partnership with all of his children (six sons and ?
daughters) and their families.

The Krebs family was involved in many community organizations, including
local government. Mr J Krebs later served many years as Murgon Shire
Council Chairman. Their contribution to Christ Church Murgon has been
recognized with pews and plaques in the church. Photos.

\section{Trevor Clyde Cichero}

TBD

\section{Dr Bernard Monz}

Dr Bernard Monz was a resident medical practitioner in Murgon for many
years and was instrumental in moves for the establishment of the Murgon
Maternity Hospital which has since become Murgon's General Hospital. He
served the Anglican community over many years, serving as an
accomplished organist whose musical abilities regularly graced the
Christ Church services. His family members were regular worshipers and
generous supporters of the church in its various endeavours.

\section{Bill Roberts}

\chapter{Conclusion}

It has been a pleasure and honour to have been able to piece together a
summary of the history of this church which has been such an integral
part of the district even before the construction of the physical
evidence in the shape of a church. While I am conscious that it tells
just a little of the whole story, it does provide at least some small
tribute to those who began the founding work of the district, the town
and this church and affirms the relevance and significance of the past
in relation to the present.

Our decisions right now will shape the future of `church', this parish,
an Anglican presence in the area and how it operates in the area in the
future. Dramatic change appears inevitable. Accordingly, the telling of
the story of this building cannot be divorced from the story of the
people who brought both it and the town of Murgon into being and who
have served God and the community from the mid-1840s through the decades
to where we are now and beyond.

\backmatter
\chapter{Appendicies}

\section{Murgon Mothers Union}

\textbf{MURGON MOTHERS UNION INFORMATION AND PICTURES; I also officiated
at most of the annual MU Thanksgiving services in Murgon where reps from
all centres in the Deanery attended.}

\textbf{GUILD: Find out date of ending. Include late/final Guild report
if possible. Give credit to the many willing ladies (assisted by their
menfolk) in their endeavours. Too many names to mention but some recent
devoted and long serving members, many deceased, could be included maybe
with photos.}

HI Marcia,

~

This is the last lot of photo's to send

The photo of the ladies are possibly Mothers Union or even Ladies Guild.

Mum was treasurer of Anglican Ladies Guild for several decades - not
sure of the exact amount of time.

I remember her always attending the Women's Day of Prayer and Mothers
Union get togethers for both meetings and lunches.

Dad held the position of Church Warden and would often mow the lawn and
keep the grounds tidy.

They were both regular attendees of church and involved in the 'life' of
the church from doing the flowers to the many cups of teas for various
services.

Chocolate Slice, Lemon slice and jam slice with a date loaf now and then
was always baked for cuppa's and we always enjoyed the rejects or
leftovers.

Let me know if I've left anything out and good luck with putting all the
pieces together.

~

Kind regards,

Bev Kapernick

\section{Church Of The Holy Spirit -
Cherbourg}

Needs a lot of work and revision.

Anglican church at Cherbourg was constructed in 1919. (Ration Shed book)

Dr Tony Matthews -- ``Landscapes of Change'' Page 99: ``The Church of
England has had a presence in Cherbourg since 1919, the first service
was held at the settlement on 2 February, 1919, and was presided over by
Vicar R W Shand. Services were conducted in the community hall near the
show-grounds and the church was built in 1939, being dedicated and
opened by the Right Reverend Bishop H Dixon on 19 February that year''

\subsection{1991-1997 : Rector Rev Bavin
Clarke.}

It was during this time that there were moves by the Cherbourg community
to become a separate Parish under the control of Indigenous Ministries.
An indigenous Minister, \textbf{Rev Wayne Connolly} from North
Queensland, was appointed with sole responsibility for Cherbourg
ministry, under the umbrella and guidance (mentoring) of Fr Bavin Clarke
in Murgon. His incumbency was short-lived and another northern region
minister\textbf{, Rev Wayne Collins (Stafford?)} succeeded him. He too
left after a short period. Cherbourg Anglican church was granted
Provisional Parish Status under \textbf{Rev Jenny Thompson,} with a
5-year term to prove viability as an independent parish. All three of
the above indigenous ministers were installed and commissioned with
great pomp and ceremony, attended by a large contingent of Diocesan
dignitaries as well as representatives from all local church
denominations and residents from the entire district and from Cherbourg
town itself. Responsibility for the Cherbourg church building and its
worshiping community was removed totally from Parish of Kilkivan at this
time. However, this laudable venture did not succeed (proved unviable).
Rev Jenny returned to live in Brisbane. Cherbourg, without notice to
Murgon's Rector or administration team, reverted to Kilkivan (Barambah)
Parish control in 2000. Thus, no arrangements for regular services in
that centre were made. Funerals were conducted by Indigenous Ministries
who travelled to the town or by Murgon's priest or licenced Liturgical
Lay persons.

Efforts have been made to re-introduce regular worship services.
Regional Bishop, the Rt Rev'd Robert Nolan made several trips from
Toowoomba for this purpose and with a view to appointing an Indigenous
Lay Minister to officiate. Sadly, these efforts did not achieve a
favourable outcome. The building has since fallen into disrepair through
neglect and vandalism. Officially closed by +Cam Venables.

\section{Holy Trinity, Windera}

A former local resident and congregation member, Mrs Joyce Stephens had
written\emph{: ``When it was decided to build a Church at Windera there
was a significant number of Anglican (then known as Church of England)
families in this dairy farming district -- most with young children.
There was thus seen to be a need for a local place of worship in lieu of
the monthly service held in the local Windera dance hall. The nearest
Church of England was at Murgon, 18 miles away -- over a bumpy,
pot-holey road -- for most, in a breezy `ute'.}

\emph{A lot of volunteer work went into the construction and the women
were involved with painting. Farm `utes' were handy for sanding in to
get further up the external walls with the brush. I can remember our
Dodge truck being backed in to the front of the church\ldots''} (to
reach the high point in the front gable).

A Church of England Ladies Guild was formed with an elected President
and a Secretary/Treasurer. (\emph{Who?)} Members set about raising
funds, mainly from street stalls in Murgon, which were very popular with
the Public. Mrs Stephens was founding guild member and writes\ldots:
``\emph{As soon as we had set up, business-men from both sides of the
street would come to see and select from home-made goodies. The trees in
the central park provided welcome shade and shelter.}

\emph{The day before these ``events'' was spent cooking cakes (double
sponges sold at 1/6 (one shilling and sixpence or our 15c). All kinds of
slices and biscuits, together with any home-grown vegetables, and
pickles, chutneys and jams -- also potted plants and bric-a-brac.}

\emph{Cattle sales in Murgon and Pig and Calf auctions at Cloyna (near
its railway siding) were also catered for with sandwiches, tea or coffee
under the shade of a tree. Buck and Chum Pratt, (Photo)the auctioneers,
relished these lunch provisions. No tea bags or instant coffee those
days -- loose tea leaves into a pot of boiling water or for coffee,
bottled coffee essence and lots of hot milk. One of our latter
fund-raising events was a Mini Debutante Ball held in the Cloyna Hall
with local young boys partnering the lovely young girls as the Debs.''}

\emph{The Diocesan list of parishes has Windera listed in 1931 with no
name as part of the Murgon Parish and then transferred to Kilkivan
Parish in 1935.}

1954 -1956 Rev J Kruger was Rector. As recorded in the Service Register
for the Parish, a stump-capping ceremony for the proposed St Katharine's
Church at Windera took place in 1955. Though no written evidence has
been procured, it is generally accepted that this was the preferred name
as voted by the guild members.

An old Services Register in an envelope marked Kilkivan has been
confirmed as the Services Register for Windera. The pages for 1958 show
the following entries:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
  Date - 25\textsuperscript{th} May; Day -- Whitsunday; Hour of Service
  -- 2.30pm; Service -- Dedication of Holy Spirit Church, Windera;
  Congregation -- 280; Officiating Clergymen and Preacher -- H J
  Richards (signature) and R A Donne (signature).
\item
  H J Richards -- Venerable Archdeacon Harold John Richards is listed in
  the 1958 Yearbook as Rural Dean for the Burnett 1951 -- 1956 and
  Archdeacon of Wide and Burnett 1956 -- 1970. R A Donne (Richard
  Albert) is listed in the 1957 Yearbook as Rector of Kilkivan from 1956
  with the address being Christ Church Rectory, Murgon. The position of
  Clergy for Kilkivan Parish in the 1958 Yearbook is listed as vacant.
\end{enumerate}

Guild meetings and activities continued in the new church's vestry

\emph{``Church services were always well attended, and a Carols night
was held each year with the church abloom with flowers. The congregation
was treated to solo items from the children.}

\emph{Sadly, today the story is different. Families have grown up and
drifted away. The easy trip to Murgon with fast cars and a bitumen road
is a world away. To those who were responsible for the building, this
day is a regrettable occasion -- many have not lived to see its
demise.''} \textbf{Joyce Stephens}

``Holy Trinity'', Windera, `the little brown church', was officially
closed and deconsecrated in 2005 by Bishop Rob Nolan -- 50 years after
the stump-capping ceremony and 47 years as an honoured place of worship
to the local district and a landmark for travelers, situated as it was
on the main highway between Murgon and Gayndah.

As a part of the Kilkivan Parish, the list of rectors over the years of
its existence as a place of worship can be found in the Christ Church,
Murgon history.

Following closure the property was auctioned and purchase by local
resident on the neignbouring property, Mr Peter Coombes. It has since
been relocated to Cloyna State School where it functions happily as a
Library and Classroom.

\textbf{Memories from some of the original children of the
congregation.}

I have very clear memories of church services in old Windera Dance Hall.
We sat on long, backless seats holding about 6 people and not very
comfortable for an hour-long service. Hymns were accompanied by piano
music. I remember May Solomon and Sadie Baulch as pianists though I am
sure there were others as well. I have a very vague memory or Rev. Jull
and more vivid ones of Rev Thompson who also conducted Sunday School
sessions at Windera. I amazed at how he found the time to fit all that
in when I now look at the schedule he had to adhere to, the distances
travelled between centres and the state of the roads then. More about
him and subsequent Rectors is included in later chapters.

Services at Windera were held twice a month on 2\textsuperscript{nd} and
4\textsuperscript{th} Sundays -- one at 11 a.m. and one at 2 p.m. -- not
a good time on a burning hot summer's afternoon and certainly not
conducive to wide-awake attention! St David's, Boonara, also had this
arrangement with the times oppositely arranged. This continued into the
incumbency of Rev'd Donald Campbell, who re-organized the entire
services schedule to allow for morning services only. His reasoning was,
in his own words -- ``\emph{It might be acceptable for a congregation to
feel sleepy under such circumstances, but when even the Rector starts to
drop off to sleep, thing just have to change.''} Rev Donald was a bit of
a change-maker in other areas as well. He introduced his guitar playing
and the singing of choruses into what had been a strictly traditional
format. He also had a section for children's stories and often used
puppets to assist in the story-telling.

The Hall was used for all community functions and often hosted
travelling Movie people and country dances on Saturday nights. When
church was held the next day, we children would make a `b-line' for the
ticket office which lighted and situated inside the building, was
accessed through an outdoor window for patrons to pay their entry fee.
Quite often, several coins could be found on the ground below where
change had been dropped in the dark. These were gladly retrieved on
Sunday - any coin was a real gift. I believe some of them even made
their way into the offerings plate that day.

I also attend the official opening of Holy Trinity, Windera, by
Archbishop Halse in 1958. I was a student at Murgon High School, a
boarder at the Murgon Methodist Student Hostel, and was lucky enough to
be given transport to Windera in the front seat with Mr and Mrs Tom
McAntee (former Windera residents) while all the boys travelled in the
open back of their utility. The McAntees were former farming people from
Windera -- much involved in the original moves for a church building
prior to moving to Murgon and a Café business in town. Their eldest son,
Tom, continued the farming business and church affiliation at Windera
for many more years.

The old local Hall was eventually sold to Mr Dermott Smith and
demolished, the timber being used in the construction of Dermot and Pat
(Richards) Smith's home on Bellotties' Road between Cloyna and Murgon. I
was saddened to see `my little church' close but, as a member of the
wider parish, we all have to come to the realization that `the church'
is more than just a building. Worship and service continued. Just the
venue changed. (\textbf{Marcia McIntosh.)}

\textbf{Rhonda Baulch writes: *} I know that the timber for the church
came from our back paddock. I remember going there with Dad (Mr Don
Baulch) when a load was being delivered during its building and the
carpenter (Mr Luke Pringle) said he was going to use me for a nail. I
was pretty little.

*(I remember) ``\ldots going to church for the~2.00pm~service and a
hail-storm came over. The minister gave up half-way through the service
`cause we couldn't hear anything other than the hail on the roof. When
we left the torrents were up to my knees with small hail making the hill
behind Windera look like it snowed with all the trees stripped of
leaves.

*My Mum and I fixed (set up) the altar and Mum played the hymns.
(Author's comment: Rhonda's mum, Sadie Baulch, was my Aunt and
Godmother.),

\textbf{Elaine Collett:}

All 3 of my babies were christened in the Windera Church. Anita, Approx.
July 1968.~~ Anthony December 1970, and Richard November 1971.

I don't have their certificates for the exact dates but was so proud to
have had all 3 christened in our beautiful little church, which seemed
to me to be the meeting place for the local community.

Fond memories of looking forward to seeing which lovely hat my aunt
Sadie Baulch would be wearing.

In later years, the church was always a welcome site when travelling
back to the farm from Boyne Island, knowing I was almost home....

~I can remember going to the old Windera hall for Bible classes, but not
much more than that.

I was married in the Murgon Church on 9\textsuperscript{th}~September
1967.

~

\textbf{Fay Trevor}: I can remember when I was in High School at Murgon
I was due to be confirmed this one particular night in Murgon Anglican
Church. Anyway, arrived home from School via the bus so would have been
about~4.45pm~and Rev.Gerlach was waiting at home to take me down to the
Windera Anglican Church to Christen me. He had his Dad with him as
witness. Guess I couldn't be confirmed without having first been
Christened. I remember at the time that I was so pleased to get out of
going to the dairy that arvo. Would have been 1964-1966. Not sure which
year

\section{Hivesville Church}

Situated strategically between the towns of Murgon, Wondai and
Proston,the Hivesville of today is a small village settlement -- shadow
of it's former presence as a major business centre servicing an extended
newly settled area. Originally named Jaumbill, the aboriginal name, (as
recorded in Dr Tony Matthews' ``Landscapes of Change'' Vol. 2, Pg 563)
``\emph{The name Hivesville was given to the township in honour of
George Hives, early grazier of ``Sunday Creek'' station \ldots{} a
Mondure Station resumption in 1895\ldots{} the change being gazetted on
2 March 1923''.} As with many other settlements growth increased rapidly
with the coming of the railway,

Anglican Church of the Holy Spirit'', Hivesville: Mrs Hives donated the
land on which the church building was constructed. Though a thriving
worship centre for many years, declining population also resulted in
seriously reduced congregation. The church went through a series of
off-and-on-again offering of services, the final effort being reduced to
one service on 5\textsuperscript{th}Sunday/month each year -- thus
reducing the number to 4 services annually. Sadly, termites seriously
infected the buiding and, all things considered, the reluctant choice of
closure was agreed to in the following motion.

Officially closed by Bishop Nolan in a special ceremony of
de-consecration in 2005 after closing Windera. The Murgon Shire Council
indicated an interest in obtaining the building for inclusion in the
Murgon Historical Society's complex on Murgon/Gayndah Road outskirts of
Murgon, because of its historic value to the area. Following
negotiations between Barambah Anglican Parish, the Anglican Diocese of
Brisbane and the Murgon Shire Council it was agreed that the building be
gifted to the Historical Society Complex with the recipient Shire
Council meeting all costs of removal, transport, renovation and repairs.

Plaque on the building records: \emph{``This historic building, the
former Church of the Holy Spirit, Hivesville, was gifted to the Murgon
Shire Council in (May 2006) by the members of the Anglican Parish of
Barambah to be relocated in this Murgon Museum Complex, and to stand as
a permanent memorial to the early Christian settlers.'' Photo}

\textbf{A segment of the HISTORY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, HIVESVILLE.
(Courtesy Barbara Hockey)}

As with many early structures of a District, the history of the Holy
Spirit Church in Hivesville is known best by those who have gone before
us. We know the building was designed by Mr. C. Bird, was funded by
donations and local fundraising and built by volunteers. Hardwood used
in the construction was sawn locally at Messrs Keleher Bros'. mill. Mr.
F. H. Jones used silky-oak

timber to make the Altar, Font, Lectern and Altar book-rest. Services
began on 15\textsuperscript{th} May 1932. A description of the opening
claimed:

\emph{For the first time in the history of the hamlet of Hivesville, on
Sunday forenoon there was heard the musical toll of a church bell, the
occasion being the opening of the first local church building -- the
Church of the Holy Spirit, recently erected and completed by local and
district adherents of the Church of England. 150 parishioners attended
the opening.}

The bell was donated by Mrs. Marj Whelan, after having done duty at old
Burrandowan Station homestead for a period approaching a century.

The church remained the centre of the social and religious life of
Hivesville for the following forty-seven years. The current Register of
Service is dated 1951. During those early days the Bush Brotherhood
visited the remote centres often giving Services at a Station House or
Hayshed.

Early times saw two parish areas, Murgon/Kilkivan which included
churches in Kilkivan, Boonara, Goomeri, Windera, Cherbourg and Murgon
and the Wondai Parish covering Wondai, Mondure, Hivesville, Proston, and
Durong. In the early 80s Durong moved into the Jandowae Parish and then
came the amalgamation of the other parishes to become known as the
Barambah Parish.

The last service (for that era) was conducted by the Rev. Bill Davidson
on 1\textsuperscript{st} May 1976. The church stood empty until a public
meeting in 1979 decided to officially close the Church. It remained
closed until on the 30\textsuperscript{th} October 1988 the old building
again resounded to the singing of hymns when the Rev. Stuart James of
the Wondai Parish conducted a service. The local store owners closed
their doors in order to attend and people came from Proston and Mondure
to swell the congregation to 24 worshipers. Thus began a new era for the
Church of the Holy Spirit. Services were held on the
5\textsuperscript{th} Sunday of the Month so were really only held four
times a year. With such minimal use it was thought un-economical to
retain the connection of rural power, so for the Services held in the
evening, Rev. James brought along his little generator that `putted
away' outside allowing the use of

the pretty lights around the walls. Power was again re-connected and at
times when no Organist was available, we could play tapes to assist the
few voices with song. A Service on the 24\textsuperscript{th} July 1994
saw the blessing of the new carpet, thanks to an anonymous donation from
a local parishioner, and the new Altar Cloths, hand-crocheted by my
mother, Alma Horne. On the 27\textsuperscript{th} August 1995 the
National Flag was dedicated and what I believe to be the last
Christening in the church also took place. The child's name was,
unfortunately, not entered in the Register, just the record of the
Service.

My association with the Hivesville Church began in the early 80s. During
the preparation for our wedding in June 1983 my late husband Russell,
discovered that he in fact had not been christened. Whilst his mother
had very close association with the then Church of England, she was
mistaken with her interpretation of ``christening''. Mrs. Hockey
believed that the denomination of the Church in which you are christened
becomes your denomination for life rather than you being christened to
the family of God. She therefore did not christen her children, leaving
it to them to decide a denomination when they were old enough to choose
for themselves. I remember as clear as today the delightful Christening
Service held in Holy Spirit Hivesville. It is not registered in the
Service Register as the Church was officially not in service at the
time. Rev. Stewart James officiated, Jimmy Smith from Sunday Creek was
witness with Russell and I being the other people present. This little
ceremony sparked the flame that then saw the Church eventually re-open
for worship in 1988.

As costs escalated and congregation numbers become fewer it was decided
to close the Hivesville and Windera churches. During sad little services
on the 31\textsuperscript{st} May 2005, Bishop Rob Nolan de-consecrated
the churches. After much discussion the Parish Council decided to donate
the Holy Spirit Church to the Murgon Historical Museum, as the people
buying the land had no use for the building, following a termite attack.
Our worries deepened with the news of Shire amalgamation, which hinted
at the loss of such facilities as Museums. Fortunately, there was a
hard-working, caring band of volunteers who decided that the Museum must
survive. I thank from the bottom of my heart the people involved with
maintaining the Museum and my special thanks to the team who applied for
and achieved funding to re-erect our lovely little Church. It is sad
that Russell, Jim Smith, Rev. Stewart James, and no doubt others, have
not lived to see the church in its present state -- I am sure they are
aware of the happenings -- the loving care taken in bringing the Church
back to life as

Murgon Chapel.

The Hockey Family connection with this Chapel is reflected in the
Memorial window erected in memory of Russell and the Family Bible which
sits on the Altar. This connection was strengthened on
23\textsuperscript{rd} September 2017 when my son, Nicholas, married the
love of his life, Nikita Dormer in this historic Murgon Chapel.''
\textbf{Provided by Barbara Hockey.}


\textbf{The Chapel}\\
Originally the Anglican Church at Hivesville, the chapel was milled and
built by farmers in\\
the district in the early 1930s.\\
The Stained Glass Window was donated by a member of the congregation in
memory of\\
members of her family who had passed away. The original church bell is
also a feature\\
which visitors love to ring.\\
Our Museum Chapel is an ideal venue for weddings, christenings or maybe
the renewal of~wedding vows.

